REMINISCENCES OF A STOCK OPERATOR by Edwin LeFevre

Chapter I
I went to work when I was just out of grammar school. I got a job as quotation-board
boy in a stockbrokerage office. I was quick at figures. At school I did three years of
arithmetic in one. I was particularly good at mental arithmetic. As quotation-board boy I
posted the numbers on the big board in the customers' room. One of the customers
usually sat by the ticker and called out the prices. They couldn't come too fast for me. I
have always remembered figures. No trouble at all.
There were plenty of other employees in that office. Of course I made friends with the
other fellows, but the work I did, if the market was active, kept me too busy from ten
a.m. to three p.m. to let me do much talking. I don't care for it, anyhow, during business
hours.
But a busy market did not keep me from thinking about the work. Those quotations did
not represent prices of stocks to me, so many dollars per share. They were numbers. Of
course, they meant something. They were always changing. It was all I had to be
interested in the changes. Why did they change? I didn't know. I didn't care. I didn't
think about that. I simply saw that they changed. That was all I had to think about five
hours every day and two on Saturdays: that they were always changing.
That is how I first came to be interested in the behaviour of prices. I had a very good
memory for figures. I could remember in detail how the prices had acted on the previous
day, just before they went up or down. My fondness for mental arithmetic came in very
handy.
I noticed that in advances as well as declines, stock prices were apt to show certain
habits, so to speak. There was no end of parallel cases and these made precedents to
guide me. I was only fourteen, but after I had taken hundreds of observations in my
mind I found myself testing their accuracy, comparing the behaviour of stocks to-day
with other days. It was not long before I was anticipating movements in prices. My only
guide, as I say, was their past performances. I carried the "dope sheets" in my mind. I
looked for stock prices to run on form. I had "clocked" them. You know what I mean.
You can spot, for instance, where the buying is only a trifle better than the selling. A
battle goes on in the stock market and the tape is your telescope. You can depend upon it
seven out of ten cases.
Another lesson I learned early is that there is nothing new in Wall Street. There can't be
because speculation is as old as the hills. Whatever happens in the stock market to-day
has happened before and will happen again. I've never forgotten that. I suppose I really
manage to remember when and how it happened. The fact that I remember that way is
my way of capitalizing experience.
I got so interested in my game and so anxious to anticipate advances and declines in all
the active stocks that I got a little book. I put down my observations in it. It was not a
record of imaginary transactions such as so many people keep merely to make or lose
millions of dollars without getting the swelled head or going to the poorhouse. It was
rather a sort of record of my hits and misses, and next to the determination of probable
movements I was most interested in verifying whether I had observed accurately; in
other words, whether I was right.
Say that after studying every fluctuation of the day in an active stock I would conclude
that it was behaving as it always did before it broke eight or ten points. Well, I would jot
down the stock and the price on Monday, and remembering past performances I would
write down what it ought to do on Tuesday and Wednesday. Later I would check up
with actual transcriptions from the tape.
That is how I first came to take an interest in the message of the tape. The fluctuations
were from the first associated in my mind with upward or downward movements. Of
course there is always a reason for fluctuations, but the tape does not concern itself with
the why and wherefore. It doesn't go into explanations. I didn't ask the tape why when I
was fourteen, and I don't ask it to-day, at forty. The reason for what a certain stock does
to-day may not be known for two or three days, or weeks, or months. But what the
dickens does that matter? Your business with the tape is now not tomorrow. The reason
can wait. But you must act instantly or be left. Time and again I see this happen. You'll
remember that Hollow Tube went down three points the other day while the rest of the
market rallied sharply. That was the fact. On the following Monday you saw that the
directors passed the dividend. That was the reason. They knew what they were going to
do, and even if they didn't sell the stock themselves they at least didn't buy it There was
no inside buying; no reason why it should not break.
Well, I kept up my little memorandum book perhaps six months. Instead of leaving for
home the moment I was through with my work, I'd jot down the figures I wanted and
would study the changes, always looking for the repetitions and parallelisms of
behaviour learning to read the tape, although I was not aware of it at the time.
One day one of the office boys he was older than I came to me where I was eating my
lunch and asked me on the quiet if I had any money.
"Why do you want to know?" I said.
"Well," he said, "I've got a dandy tip on Burlington. I'm going to play it if I can get
somebody to go in with me."
"How do you mean, play it?" I asked. To me the only people who played or could play
tips were the customers old jiggers with oodles of dough. Why, it cost hundreds, even
thousands of dollars, to get into the game. It was like owning your private carriage and
having a coachman who wore a silk hat.
"That's what I mean; play it!" he said.
"How much you got?"
"How much you need?"
"Well, I can trade in five shares by putting up $5."
"How are you going to play it?"
"I'm going to buy all the Burlington the bucket shop will let me carry with the money I
give him for margin," he said. "It's going up sure. It's like picking up money. We'll
double ours in a jiffy."
"Hold on!" I said to him, and pulled out my little dope book.
I wasn't interested in doubling my money, but in his saying that Burlington was going
up. If it was, my note-book ought to show it. I looked. Sure enough, Burlington,
according to my figuring, was acting as it usually did before it went up. I had never
bought or sold anything in my life, and I never gambled with the other boys. But all I
could see was that this was a grand chance to test the accuracy of my work, of my
hobby. It struck me at once that if my dope didn't work in practice there was nothing in
the theory of it to interest anybody. So I gave him all I had, and with our pooled
resources he went to one of the nearby bucket shops and bought some Burlington. Two
days later we cashed in. I made a profit of $3.12.
After that first trade, I got to speculating on my own hook in the bucket shops. I'd go
during my lunch hour and buy or sell it never made any difference to me. I was playing
a system and not a favorite stock or backing opinions. All I knew was the arithmetic of
it. As a matter of fact, mine was the ideal way to operate in a bucket shop, where all that
a trader does is to bet on fluctuations as they are printed by the ticker on the tape.
It was not long before I was taking much more money out of the bucket shops than I was
pulling down from my job in the brokerage office. So I gave up my position. My folks
objected, but they couldn't say much when they saw what I was making. I was only a kid
and office-boy wages were not very high. I did mighty well on my own hook.
I was fifteen when I had my first thousand and laid the cash in front of my mother all
made in the bucket shops in a few months, besides what I had taken home. My mother
carried on something awful. She wanted me to put it away in the savings bank out of
reach of temptation. She said it was more money than she ever heard any boy of fifteen
had made, starting with nothing. She didn't quite believe it was real money. She used to
worry and fret about it. But I didn't think of anything except that I could keep on proving
my figuring was right. That's all the fun there is being right by using your head. If I was
right when I tested my convictions with ten shares I would be ten times more right if I
traded in a hundred shares. That is all that having more margin meant to me I was right
more emphatically. More courage? No! No difference! If all I have is ten dollars and I
risk it, I am much braver than when I risk a million, if I have another million salted
away.
Anyhow, at fifteen I was making a good living out of the stock market. I began in the
smaller bucket shops, where the man who traded in twenty shares at a clip was suspected
of being John W. Gates in disguise or J. P. Morgan traveling incognito. Bucket shops in
those days seldom lay down on their customers. They didn't have to. There were other
ways of parting customers from their money, even when they guessed right. The
business was tremendously profitable. When it was conducted legitimately I mean
straight, as far as the bucket shop went the fluctuations took care of the shoestrings. It
doesn't take much of a reaction to wipe out a margin of only three quarters of a point.
Also, no welsher could ever get back in the game. Wouldn't have any trade.
I didn't have a following. I kept my business to myself. It' was a one-man business,
anyhow. It was my head, wasn't it? Prices either were going the way I doped them out,
without any help from friends or partners, or they were going the other way, and nobody
could stop them out of kindness to me. I couldn't see where I needed to tell my business
to anybody else. I've got friends, of course, but my business has always been the same a
one-man affair. That is why I have always Played a lone hand.
As it was, it didn't take long for the bucket shops to get sore on me for beating them. I'd
walk in and plank down my margin, but they'd look at it without making a move to grab
it. They'd tell me there was nothing doing. That was the time they got to calling me the
Boy Plunger. I had to be changing brokers all the time, going from one bucket shop to
another. It got so that I had to give a fictitious name. I'd begin light, only fifteen or
twenty shares. At times, when they got suspicious, I'd lose on purpose at first and then
sting them proper. Of course after a little while they'd find me too expensive and they'd
tell me to take myself and my business elsewhere and not interfere with the owners'
dividends.
Once, when the big concern I'd been trading with for months shut down on me I made
up my mind to take a little more of their money away from them. That bucket shop had
branches all over the city, in hotel lobbies, and in near-by towns. I went to one of the
hotel branches and asked the manager a few questions and finally got to trading. But as
soon as I played an active stock my especial way he began to get messages from the
head office asking who it was that was operating. The manager told me what they asked
him and I told him my name was Edward Robinson, of Cambridge. He telephoned the
glad news to the big chief. But the other end wanted to know what I looked like. When
the manager told me that I said to him, "Tell him I am a short fat man with dark hair and
a bushy beard!" But he described me instead, and then he listened and his face got red
and he hung up and told me to beat it.
"What did they say to you?" I asked him politely.
"They said, 'You blankety-blank fool, didn't we tell you to take no business from Larry
Livingston? And you deliberately let him trim us out of $700!'' He didn't say what else
they told him.
I tried the other branches one after another, but they all got to know me, and my money
wasn't any good in any of their offices. I couldn't even go in to look at the quotations
without some of the clerks making cracks at me. I tried to get them to let me trade at
long intervals by dividing my visits among them all. But that didn't work.
Finally there was only one left to me and that was the biggest and richest of all the
Cosmopolitan Stock Brokerage Company.
The Cosmopolitan was rated as A-1 and did an enormous business. It had branches in
every manufacturing town in New England. They took my trading all right, and I bought
and sold stocks and made and lost money for months, but in the end it happened with
them as usual. They didn't refuse my business point-blank, as the small concerns had.
Oh, not because it wasn't sportsmanship, but because they knew it would give them a
black eye to publish the news that they wouldn't take a fellow's business just because
that fellow happened to make a little money. But they did the next worse thing that is,
they made me put up a three-point margin and compelled me to pay a premium at first of
a half point, then a point, and finally, a point and a half. Some handicap, that! How?
Easy! Suppose Steel was selling at 90 and you bought it. Your ticket read, normally:
"Bot ten Steel at 90-1/8." If you put up a point margin it meant that if it broke 89-1/4
you were wiped out automatically. In a bucket shop the customer is not importuned for
more margin or put to the painful necessity of telling his broker to sell for anything he
can get.
But when the Cosmopolitan tacked on that premium they were hitting below the belt. It
meant that if the price was 90 when I bought, instead of making my ticket: "Bot Steel at
90-l/8," it read: "Bot Steel at 91-1/8." Why, that stock could advance a point and a
quarter after I bought it and I'd still be losing money if I closed the trade. And by also
insisting that I put up a three-point margin at the very start they reduced my trading
capacity by two thirds. Still, that was the only bucket shop that would take my business
at all, and I had to accept their terms or quit trading.
Of course I had my ups and downs, but was a winner on balance. However, the
Cosmopolitan people were not satisfied with the awful handicap they had tacked on me,
which should have been enough to beat anybody. They tried to double-cross me. They
didn't get me. I escaped because of one of my hunches.
The Cosmopolitan, as I said, was my last resort. It was the richest bucket shop in New
England, and as a rule they put no limit on a trade. I think I was the heaviest individual
trader they had that is, of the steady, every-day customers. They had a fine office and the
largest and completest quotation board I have ever seen anywhere. It ran along the
whole length of the big room and every imaginable thing was quoted. I mean stocks
dealt in on the New York and Boston Stock Exchanges, cotton, wheat, provisions,
metals everything that was bought and sold in New York, Chicago, Boston and
Liverpool.
You know how they traded in bucket shops. You gave your money to a clerk and told
him what you wished to buy or sell. He looked at the tape or the quotation board and
took the price from there the last one, of course. He also put down the time on the ticket
so that it almost read like a regular broker's report that is, that they had bought or sold
for you so many shares of such a stock at such a price at such a time on such a day and
how much money they received from you. When you wished to close your trade you
went to the clerk the same or another, it depended on the shop and you told him. He took
the last price or if the stock had not been active he waited for the next quotation that
came out on the tape. He wrote that price and the time on your ticket, O.K.'d it and gave
it back to you, and then you went to the cashier and got whatever cash it called for. Of
course, when the market went against you and the price went beyond the limit set by
your margin, your trade automatically closed itself and your ticket became one more
scrap of paper.
In the humbler bucket shops, where people were allowed to trade in as little as five
shares, the tickets were little slips different colors for buying and selling and at times, as
for instance in boiling bull markets, the shops would be hard hit because all the
customers were bulls and happened to be right. Then the bucket shop would deduct both
buying and selling commissions and if you bought a stock at 20 the ticket would read
20-1/4. You thus had only 3/4 of a point's run for your money.
But the Cosmopolitan was the finest in New England. It had thousands of patrons and I
really think I was the only man they were afraid of. Neither the killing premium nor the
three-point margin they made me put up reduced my trading much. I kept on buying and
selling as much as they'd let me. I sometimes had a line of 5000 shares.
Well, on the day the thing happened that I am going to tell you, I was short thirty-five
hundred shares of Sugar. I had seven big pink tickets for five hundred shares each. The
Cosmopolitan used big slips with a blank space on them where they could write down
additional margin. Of course, the -bucket shops never ask for more margin. The thinner
the shoestring the better for them, for their profit lies in your being wiped. In the smaller
shops if you wanted to margin your trade still further they'd make out a new ticket, so
they could charge you the buying commission and only give you a run of 3/4 of a point
on each point's decline, for they figured the selling commission also exactly as if it were
a new trade.
Well, this day I remember I had up over $10,000 in margins.
I was only twenty when I first accumulated ten thousand dollars in cash. And you ought
to have heard my mother. You'd have thought that ten thousand dollars in cash was more
than anybody carried around except old John D., and she used to tell me to be satisfied
and go into some regular business. I had a hard time convincing her that I was not
gambling, but making money by figuring. But all she could see was that ten thousand
dollars was a lot of money and all I could see was more margin.
I had put out my 3509 shares of Sugar at 105-1/4. There was another fellow in the room,
Henry Williams, who was short 2500 shares. I used to sit by the ticker and call out the
quotations for the board boy. The price behaved as I thought it would. It promptly went
down a couple of points and paused a little to get its breath before taking another dip.
The general market was pretty soft and everything looked promising. Then all of a
sudden I didn't like the way Sugar was doing its hesitating. I began to feel
uncomfortable. I thought I ought to get out of the market. Then it sold at 103 that was
low for the day but instead of feeling more confident I felt more uncertain. I knew
something was wrong somewhere, but I couldn't spot it exactly. But if something was
coming and I didn't know where from, I couldn't be on my guard against it. That being
the case I'd better be out of the market.
You know, I don't do things blindly. I don't like to. I never did. Even as a kid I had to
know why I should do certain things. But this time I had no definite reason to give to
myself, and yet I was so uncomfortable that I couldn't stand it. I called to a fellow I
knew, Dave Wyman, and said to him : "Dave, you take my place here. I want you to do
something for me. Wait a little before you call out the next price of Sugar, will you?"
He said he would, and I got up and gave him my place by the ticker so he could call out
the prices for the boy. I took my seven Sugar tickets out of my pocket and walked over
to the counter, to where the clerk was who marked the tickets when you closed your
trades. But I didn't really know why I should get out of the market, so I just stood there,
leaning against the counter, my tickets in my hand so that the clerk couldn't see them.
Pretty soon I heard the clicking of a telegraph instrument and I saw Tom Burnham, the
clerk, turn his head quickly and listen. Then I felt that something crooked was hatching,
and I decided not to wait any longer. Just then Dave Wyman by the ticker, began: "Su-"
and quick as a flash I slapped my tickets on the counter in front of the clerk and yelled,
"Close Sugar!" before Dave had finished calling the price. So, of course, the house had
to close my Sugar at the last quotation. What Dave called turned out to be 103 again.
According to my dope Sugar should have broken 103 by now. The engine wasn't hitting
right. I had the feeling that there was a trap in the neighborhood. At all events, the
telegraph instrument was now going like mad and I noticed that Tom Burnham, the
clerk, had left my tickets unmarked where I laid them, and was listening to the clicking
as if he were waiting for something. So I yelled at him: "Hey, Tom, what in hell are you
waiting for? Mark the price on these tickets 103! Get a gait on!"
Everybody in the room heard me and began to look toward us and ask what was the
trouble, for, you see, while the Cosmopolitan had never laid down, there was no telling,
and a run on a bucket shop can start like a run on a bank. If one customer gets suspicious
the others follow suit. So Tom looked sulky, but came over and marked my tickets
"Closed at 103" and shoved the seven of them over toward me. He sure had a sour face.
Say, the distance from Tom's place to the cashier's cage "wasn't over eight feet. But I
hadn't got to the cashier to get my money when Dave Wyman by the ticker yelled
excitedly: "Gosh! Sugar, 108!" But it was too late; so I just laughed and called over to
Tom, "It didn't work that time, did it, old boy?"
Of course, it was a put-up job. Henry Williams and I together were short six thousand
shares of Sugar. That bucket shop had my margin and Henry's, and there may have been
a lot of other Sugar shorts in the office; possibly eight or ten thousand shares in all.
Suppose they had $20,000 in Sugar margins. That was enough to pay the shop to
thimblerig the market on the New York Stock Exchange and wipe us out. In the old days
whenever a bucket shop found itself loaded with too many bulls on a certain stock it was
a common practice to get some broker to wash down the price of that particular stock far
enough to wipe out all the customers that were long of it. This seldom cost the bucket
shop more than a couple of points on a few hundred shares, and they made thousands of
dollars.
That was what the Cosmopolitan did to get me and Henry Williams and the other Sugar
shorts. Their brokers in New York ran up the price to 108. Of course it fell right back,
but Henry and a lot of others were wiped out. Whenever there was an unexplained sharp
drop which was followed by instant recovery, the newspapers in those days used to call
it a bucket-shop drive.
And the funniest thing was that not later than ten days after the Cosmopolitan people
tried to double-cross me a New York operator did them out of over seventy thousand
dollars. This man, who was quite a market factor in his day and a member of the New
York Stock Exchange, made a great name for himself as a bear during the Bryan panic
of '96. He was forever running up against Stock Exchange rules that kept him from
carrying out some of his plans at the expense of his fellow members. One day he figured
that there would be no complaints from either the Exchange or the police authorities if
he took from the bucket shops of the land some of their ill-gotten gains. In the instance I
speak of he sent thirty-five men to act as customers. They went to the main office and to
the bigger branches. On a certain day at a fixed hour the agents all bought as much of a
certain stock as the managers would let them. They had instructions to sneak out at a
certain profit. Of course what he did was to distribute bull tips on that stock among his
cronies and then he went in to the floor of the Stock Exchange and bid up the price,
helped by the room traders, who thought he was a good sport Being careful to pick out
the right stock for that work, there was no trouble in putting up the price three or four
points. His agents at the bucket shops cashed in as prearranged.
A fellow told me the originator cleaned up seventy thousand dollars net, and his agents
made their expenses and then pay besides. He played that game several times all over
the country, punishing the bigger bucket shops of New York, Boston, Philadelphia,
Chicago, Cincinnati and St. Louis. One of his favorite stocks was Western Union,
because it was so easy to move a semi active stock like that a few points up en-down.
His agents bought it at a certain figure, sold at two points profit, went short and took
three points more. By the way, I read the other day that that man died, poor and obscure.
If he had died in 1896 he would have got at least a column on the first page of every
New York paper. As it was he got two lines on the fifth.


Chapter II
Between the discovery that the Cosmopolitan Stock Brokerage Company was ready to
beat me by foul means if the killing handicap of a three-point margin and a point-and-ahalf
premium didn't do it, and hints that they didn't want my business anyhow, I soon
made up my mind to go to New York, where I could trade in the office of some member
of the New York Stock Exchange. I didn't want any Boston branch, where the quotations
had to be telegraphed. I wanted to be close to the original source. I came to New York at
the age of 21, bringing with me all I had, twenty-five hundred dollars.
I told you I had ten thousand dollars when I was twenty, and my margin on that Sugar
deal was over ten thousand. But I didn't always win. My plan of trading was sound
enough and won oftener than it lost. If I had stuck to it I'd have been right perhaps as
often as seven out of ten times. In fact, I always made money when I was sure I was
right before I began. What beat me was not having brains enough to stick to my own
game that is, to play the market only when I was satisfied that precedents favored my
play. There is a time for all things, but I didn't know it. And that is precisely what beats
so many men in Wall Street who are very far from being in the main sucker class. There
is the plain fool, who does the wrong thing at all times everywhere, but there is the Wall
Street fool, who thinks he must trade all the time. No man can always have adequate
reasons for buying or selling stocks daily or sufficient knowledge to make his play an
intelligent play.
I proved it Whenever I read the tape by the light of experience I made money, but when
I made a plain fool play I had to lose. I was no exception, was I? There was the huge
quotation board staring me in the face, and the ticker going on, and people trading and
watching their tickets turn" into cash or into waste paper. Of course I let the craving for
excitement get the better of my judgment. In a bucket shop where your margin is a
shoestring you don't play for long pulls. You are wiped too easily and quickly. The
desire for constant action irrespective of underlying conditions is responsible for many
losses in Wall Street even among the professionals, who feel that they must take home
some money every day, as though they were working for regular wages. I was only a
kid, remember. I did not know then what I learned later, what made me fifteen years
later, wait two long weeks and see a stock on which I was very bullish go up thirty
points before I felt that it was safe to buy it. I was broke and was trying to get back, and
I couldn't afford to play recklessly. I had to be right, and so I waited. That was in 1915.
It's a long story. I'll tell it later in its proper place. Now let's go on from where after years
of practice at beating them I let the bucket shops take away most of my winnings.
And with my eyes wide open, to boot! And it wasn't the only period of my life when I
did it, either. A stock operator has to fight a lot of expensive enemies within himself.
Anyhow, I came to New York with twenty-five hundred dollars. There were no bucket
shops here that a fellow could trust. The Stock Exchange and the police between them
had succeeded in closing them up pretty tight. Besides, I wanted to find a place where
the only limit to my trading would be the size of my stake. I didn't have much of one,
but I didn't expect it to stay little forever. The main thing at the start was to find a place
where I wouldn't have to worry about getting a square deal. So I went to a New York
Stock Exchange house that had a branch at home where I knew some of the clerks. They
have long since gone out of business. I wasn't there long, didn't like one of the partners,
and then I went to A. R. Fullerton & Co. Somebody must have told them about my early
experiences, because it was not long before they all got to calling me the Boy Trader.
I've always looked young. It was a handicap in some ways but it compelled me to fight
for my own because so many tried to take advantage of my youth. The chaps at the
bucket shops seeing what a kid I was, always thought I was a fool for luck and that that
was the only reason why I beat them so often.
Well, it wasn't six months before I was broke. I was a pretty active trader and had a sort
of reputation as a winner. I guess my commissions amounted to something. I ran up my
account quite a little, but, of course, in the end I lost. I played carefully; but I had to lose.
I'll tell you the reason: it was my remarkable success in the bucket shops!
I could beat the game my way only in a bucket shop; where I was betting on
fluctuations. My tape reading had to do with that exclusively. When I bought the price
was there on the quotation board, right in front of me. Even before I bought I knew
exactly the price I'd have to pay for my stock. And I always could sell on the instant. I
could scalp successfully, because I could move like lightning. I could follow up my luck
or cut my loss in a second. Sometimes, for instance, I was certain a stock would move at
least a point. Well, I didn't have to hog it, I could put up a point margin and double my
money in a jiffy; or I'd take half a point. On one or two hundred shares a day, that
wouldn't be bad at the end of the month, what?
The practical trouble with that arrangement, of course, was that even if the bucket shop
had the resources to stand a big steady loss, they wouldn't do it. They wouldn't have a
customer around the place who had the bad taste to win all the time.
At all events, what was a perfect system for trading in bucket shops didn't work in
Fullerton's office. There I was actually buying and selling stocks. The price of Sugar on
the tape might be 105 and I could see a three-point drop coming. As a matter of fact, at
the very moment the ticker was printing 105 on the tape the real price on the floor of the
Exchange might be 104 or 103. By the time my order to sell a thousand shares got to
Fullerton's floor man to execute, the price might be still lower. I couldn't tell at what
price I had put out my thousand shares until I got a report from the clerk. When I surely
would have made three thousand on the same transaction in a bucket shop I might not
make a cent in a Stock Exchange house. Of course, I have taken an extreme case, but the
fact remains that in A. R. Fullerton's office the tape always talked ancient history to me,
as far as my system of trading went, and I didn't realise it.
And then, too, if my order was fairly big my own sale would tend further to depress the
price. In the bucket shop I didn't have to figure on the effect of my own trading. I lost in
New York because the game was altogether different. It was not that I now was playing
it legitimately that made me lose, but that I was playing it ignorantly. I have been told
that I am a good reader of the tape. But reading the tape like an expert did not save me. I
might have made out a great deal better if I had been on the floor myself, a room trader.
In a particular crowd perhaps I might have adapted my system to the conditions
immediately before me. But, of course, if I had got to operating on such a scale as I do
now, for instance, the system would have equally failed me, on account of the effect of
my own trading on prices.
In short, I did not know the game of stock speculation. I knew a part of it, a rather
important part, which has been very valuable to me at all times. But if with all I had I
still lost, what chance does the green outsider have of winning, or, rather, of cashing in?
It didn't take me long to realise that there was something wrong with my play, but I
couldn't spot the exact trouble. There were times when my system worked beautifully,
and then, all of a sudden, nothing but one swat after another. I was only twenty-two,
remember; not that I was so stuck on myself that I didn't want to know just where I was
at fault, but that at that age nobody knows much of anything.
The people in the office were very nice to me. I couldn't plunge as I wanted to because
of their margin requirements, but old A. R. Fullerton and the rest of the firm were so
kind to me that after six months of active trading I not only lost all I had brought and all
that I had made there but I even owed the firm a few hundreds.
There I was, a mere kid, who had never before been away from home, flat broke; but I
knew there wasn't anything wrong with me; only with my play. I don't know whether I
make myself plain, but I never lose my temper over the stock market. I never argue with
the tape. Getting sore at the market doesn't get you anywhere.
I was so anxious to resume trading that I didn't lose a minute, but went to old man
Fullerton and said to him, "Say, A. R., lend me five hundred dollars."
"What for?" says he. "I've got to have some money."
"What for?" he says again.
"For margin, of course," I said.
"Five hundred dollars?" he said, and frowned. "You know they'd expect you to keep up a
10 per cent margin, and that means one thousand dollars on one hundred shares. Much
better to give you a credit-"
"No," I said, "I don't want a credit here. I already owe the firm something. What I want
is for you to lend me five hundred dollars so I can go out and get a roll and come back."
"How are you going to do it?" asked old A. R. "I'll go and trade in a bucket shop," I told
him.
"Trade here," he said.
"No," I said. "I'm not sure yet I can beat the game in this office, but I am sure I can take
money out of the bucket shops. I know that game. I have a notion that I know just where
I went wrong here."
He let me have it, and I went out of that office where the Boy Terror of the Bucket
Shops, as they called him, had lost his pile. I couldn't go back home because the shops
there would not take my business. New York was out of the question; there weren't any
doing business at that time. They tell me that in the go's Broad Street and New Street
were full of them. But there weren't any when I needed them in my business. So after
some thinking I decided to go to St. Louis. I had heard of two concerns there that did an
enormous business all through the Middle West. Their profits must have been huge.
They had branch offices in dozens of towns. In fact I had been told that there were no
concerns in the East to compare with them for volume of business. They ran openly and
the best people traded there without any qualms. A fellow even told me that the owner
of one of the concerns was a vice-president of the Chamber of Commerce but that
couldn't have been in St. Louis. At any rate, that is where I went with my five hundred
dollars to bring back a stake to use as margin in the office of A. R. Fullerton & Co.,
members of the New York Stock Exchange.
When I got to St. Louis I went to the hotel, washed up and went out to find the bucket
shops. One was the
J. G. Dolan Company, and the other was H. S. Teller & Co. I knew I could beat them. I
was going to play dead safe carefully and conservatively. My one fear was that
somebody might recognise me and give me away, because the bucket shops all over the
country had heard of the Boy Trader. They are like gambling houses and get all the
gossip of the professionals. Dolan was nearer than Teller, and I went there first. I was
hoping I might be allowed to do business a few days before they told me to take my
trade somewhere else. I walked in. It was a whopping big place and there must have
been at least a couple of hundred people there staring at the quotations. I was glad,
because in such a crowd I stood a better chance of being unnoticed. I stood and watched
the board and looked them over carefully until I picked out the stock for my initial play.
I looked around and saw the order-clerk at the window where you put down your money
and get your ticket. He was looking at me so I walked up to him and asked, "Is this
where you trade in cotton and wheat?"
"Yes, sonny," says he.
"Can I buy stocks too?"
"You can if you have the cash," he said.
"Oh, I got that all right, all right," I said like a boasting boy.
"You have, have you?" he says with a smile.
"How much stock can I buy for one hundred dollars?" I asked, peeved-like.
"One hundred; if you got the hundred."
"I got the hundred. Yes; and two hundred too!" I told him.
"Oh, my!" he said.
"Just you buy me two hundred shares," I said sharply.
"Two hundred what?" he asked, serious now. It was business.
I looked at the board again as if to guess wisely and told him, "Two hundred Omaha."
"All right!" he said. He took my money, counted it and wrote out the ticket.
"What's your name?" he asked me, and I answered, "Horace Kent."
He gave me the ticket and I went away and sat down among the customers to wait for
the roll to grow.
I got quick action and I traded several times that day. On the next day too. In two days I
made twenty-eight hundred dollars, and I was hoping they'd let me finish the week out.
At the rate I was going, that wouldn't be so bad. Then I'd tackle the other shop, and if I
had similar luck there I'd go back to New York with a wad I could do something with.
On the morning of the third day, when I went to the window, bashful-like, to buy five
hundred B. R. T. the clerk said to me, "Say, Mr. Kent, the boss wants to see you."
I knew the game was up. But I asked him, "What does he want to see me about?"
"I don't know."
"Where is he?"
"In his private office. Go in that way." And he pointed to a door. I went in. Dolan was
sitting at his desk. He swung around and said, "Sit down, Livingston."
He pointed to a chair. My last hope vanished. I don't know how he discovered who I
was; perhaps from the hotel register.
"What do you want to see me about?" I asked him.
"Listen, kid. I ain't got nothin' again yeh, see? Nothin' at all. See?"
"No, I don't see," I said.
He got up from his swivel chair. He was a whopping big guy. He said to me, "Just come
over here, Livingston, will yeh?" and he walked to the door. He opened it and then he
pointed to the customers in the big room. "D'yeh see them?" he asked.
"See what?"
"Them guys. Take a look at 'em, kid. There's three hundred of 'em! Three hundred
suckers! They feed me and my family. See? Three hundred suckers! Then yeh come in,
and in two days yeh cop more than I get out of the three hundred in two weeks. That
ain't business, kid not for me! I ain't got nothin' agin yeh. Yer welcome to what ye've
got. But yeh don't get any more. There ain't any here for yeh!"
"Why, I:"
"That's all. I seen yeh come in day before yesterday, and I didn't like yer looks. On the
level, I didn't. I spotted yeh for a ringer. I called in that jackass there" he pointed to the
guilty clerk "and asked what you'd done; and when he told me I said to him: 'I don't like
that guy's looks. He's a ringer!' And that piece of cheese says: 'Ringer my eye, boss! His
name is Horace Kent, and he's a rah-rah boy playing at being used to long pants. He's all
right!' Well, I let him have his way. That blankety-blank cost me twenty-eight hundred
dollars. I don't grudge it yeh, my boy. But the safe is locked for yeh."
"Look here " I began.
"You look here, Livingston," he said. "I've heard all about yeh. I make my money
coppering suckers' bets, and yeh don't belong here. I aim to be a sport and yer welcome
to what yeh pried off'n us. But more of that would make me a sucker, now that I know
who yeh are. So toddle along, sonny!"
I left Dolan's place with my twenty-eight hundred dollars' profit. Teller's place was in
the same block. I had found out that Teller was a very rich man who also ran up a lot of
pool rooms. I decided to go to his bucket shop. I wondered whether it would be wise to
start moderately and work up to a thousand shares or to begin with a plunge, on the
theory that I might not be able to trade more than one day. They get wise mighty quick
when they're losing and I did want to buy one thousand B. R. T. I was sure I could take
four or five points out of it. But if they got suspicious or if too many customers were
long of that stock they might not let me trade at all. I thought perhaps I'd better scatter
my trades at first and begin small.
It wasn't as big a place as Dolan's, but the fixtures were nicer and evidently the crowd
was of a better class. This suited me down to the ground and I decided to buy my one
thousand B. R. T. So I stepped up to the proper window and said to the clerk, "I'd like to
buy some B. R. T. What's the limit?"
"There's no limit," said the clerk. "You can buy all you please if you've got the money."
"Buy fifteen hundred shares," I says, and took my roll from my pocket while the clerk
starts to write the ticket.
Then I saw a red-headed man just shove that clerk away from the counter. He leaned
across and said to me, 'Say, Livingston, you go back to Dolan's. We don't want your
business."
"Wait until I get my ticket," I said. "I just bought a little B. R. T."
"You get no ticket here," he said. By this time other clerks had got behind him and were
looking at me. "Don't ever come here to trade. We don't take your business.
Understand?"
There was no sense in getting mad or trying to argue, so I went back to the hotel, paid
my bill and took the first train back to New York. It was tough. I wanted to take back
some real money and that Teller wouldn't let me make even one trade.
I got back to New York, paid Fullerton his five hundred, and started trading again with
the St. Louis money. I had good and bad spells, but I was doing better than breaking
even. After all, I didn't have much to unlearn; only to grasp the one fact that there was
more to the game of stock speculation than I had considered before I went to Fullerton's
office to trade. I was like one of those puzzle fans, doing the crossword puzzles in the
Sunday supplement. He isn't satisfied until he gets it. Well, I certainly wanted to find the
solution to my puzzle. I thought I was done with trading in bucket shops. But I was
mistaken.
About a couple of months after I got back to New York an old jigger came into
Fullerton's office. He knew A. R. Somebody said they'd once owned a string of race
horses together. It was plain he'd seen better days. I was introduced to old McDevitt. He
was telling the crowd about a bunch of Western racetrack crooks who had just pulled off
some skin game out in St. Louis. The head devil, he said, was a poolroom owner by the
name of Teller.
"What Teller?" I asked him.
"Hi Teller; H. S. Teller."
"I know that bird," I said.
"He's no good," said McDevitt.
"He's worse than that," I said, "and I have a little matter to settle with him."
"Meaning how?"
"The only way I can hit any of these short sports is through their pocketbook. I can't
touch him in St. Louis just now, but some day I will." And I told McDevitt my
grievance.
"Well," says old Mac, "he tried to connect here in New York and couldn't make it, so
he's opened a place in Hoboken. The word's gone out that there is no limit to the play
and that the house roll has got the Rock of Gibraltar faded to the shadow of a bantam
flea."
"What sort of a place?" I thought he meant pool room.
"Bucket shop," said McDevitt.
"Are you sure it's open?"
"Yes; I've seen several fellows who've told me about it."
"That's only hearsay," I said. "Can you find out positively if it's running, and also how
heavy they'll really let a man trade?"
"Sure, sonny," said McDevitt. "I'll go myself to-morrow morning, and come back here
and tell you."
He did. It seems Teller was already doing a big business and would take all he could get.
This was on a Friday. The market had been going up all that week this was twenty years
ago, remember and it was a cinch the bank statement on Saturday would show a big
decrease in the surplus reserve. That would give the conventional excuse to the big room
traders to jump on the market and try to shake out some of the weak commission-house
accounts. There would be the usual reactions in the last half hour of the trading,
particularly in stocks in which the public had been the most active. Those, of course,
also would be the very stocks that Teller's customers would be most heavily long of, and
the shop might be glad to see some short selling in them. There is nothing so nice as
catching the suckers both ways; and nothing so easy with one-point margins.
That Saturday morning I chased over to Hoboken to the Teller place. They had fitted up
a big customers' room with a dandy quotation board and a full force of clerks and a
special policeman in gray. There were about twenty-five customers.
I got talking to the manager. He asked me what he could do for me and I told him
nothing; that a fellow could make much more money at the track on account of the odds
and the freedom to bet your whole roll and stand to win thousands in minutes instead of
piking for chicken feed in stocks and having to wait days, perhaps. He began to tell me
how much safer the stock-market game was, and how much some of their customers
made you'd have sworn it was a regular broker who actually bought and sold your stocks
on the Exchange and how if a man only traded heavy he could make enough to satisfy
anybody. He must have thought I was headed for some pool room and he wanted a
whack at my roll before the ponies nibbled it away, for he said I ought to hurry up as the
market closed at twelve o'clock on Saturdays. That would leave me free to devote the
entire afternoon to other pursuits. I might have a bigger roll to carry to the track with toe
if I picked the right stocks.
I looked as if I didn't believe him, and he kept on buzzing me. I was watching the clock.
At n 115 I said, "All right," and I began to give him selling orders in various stocks. I
put up two thousand dollars in cash, and he was very glad to get it. He told me he
thought I'd make a lot of money and hoped I'd come in often.
It happened just as I figured. The traders hammered the stocks in which they figured
they would uncover the most stops, and, sure enough, prices slid off. I closed out my
trades just before the rally of the last five minutes on the usual traders' covering.
There was fifty-one hundred dollars coming to me. I went to cash in.
"I am glad I dropped in," I said to the manager, and gave him my tickets.
"Say," he says to me, "I can't give you all of it. I wasn't looking for such a run. I'll have
it here for you Monday morning, sure as blazes."
"All right. But first I'll take all you have in the house," I said.
"You've got to let me pay off the little fellows," he said. "I'll give you back what you put
up, and anything that's left. Wait till I cash the other tickets." So I waited while he paid
off the other winners. Oh, I knew my money was safe. Teller wouldn't welsh with the
office doing such a good business. And if he did, what else could I do better than to take
all he had then and there? I got my own two thousand dollars and about eight hundred
dollars besides, which was all he had in the office. I told him I'd be there Monday
morning. He swore the money would be waiting for me.
I got to Hoboken a little before twelve on Monday. I saw a fellow talking to the manager
that I had seen in the St. Louis office the day Teller told me to go back to Dolan. I knew
at once that the manager had telegraphed to the home office and they'd sent up one of
their men to investigate the story. Crooks don't trust anybody.
"I came for the balance of my money," I said to the manager.
"Is this the man?" asked the St. Louis chap.
"Yes," said the manager, and took a bunch of yellow backs from his pocket.
"Hold on!" said the St. Louis fellow to him and then turns to me, "Say, Livingston,
didn't we tell you we didn't want your business?"
"Give me my money first," I said to the manager, and he forked over two thousands,
four five-hundreds and three hundreds.
"What did you say?" I said to St. Louis.
"We told you we didn't want you to trade in our place."
"Yes," I said; "that's why I came."
"Well, don't come any more. Keep away!" he snarled at me. The private policeman in
gray came over, casual-like. St. Louis shook his fist at the manager and yelled: "You
ought to've known better, you poor boob, than to let this guy get into you. He's
Livingston. You had your orders."
"Listen, you," I said to the St. Louis man. "This isn't St. Louis. You can't pull off any
trick here, like your boss did with Belfast Boy."
"You keep away from this office! You can't trade here!" he yells.
"If I can't trade here nobody else is going to," I told him. "You can't get away with that
sort of stuff here."
Well, St. Louis changed his tune at once.
"Look here, old boy," he said, all fussed up, "do us a favor. Be reasonable! You know
we can't stand this every day. The old man's going to hit the ceiling when he hears who
it was. Have a heart, Livingston!"
"I'll go easy," I promised.
"Listen to reason, won't you? For the love of Pete, keep away! Give us a chance to get a
good start. We're new here. Will you?"
"I don't want any of this high-and-mighty business the next time I come," I said, and left
him talking to the manager at the rate of a million a minute. I'd got some money out of
them for the way they treated me in St. Louis. There wasn't any sense in my getting hot
or trying to close them up. I went back to Fullerton's office and told McDevitt what had
happened. Then I told him that if it was agreeable to him I'd like to have him go to
Teller's place and begin trading in twenty or thirty share lots, to get them used to him.
Then, the moment I saw a good chance to clean up big, I'd telephone him and he could
plunge.
I gave McDevitt a thousand dollars and he went to Hoboken and did as I told him. He
got to be one of the regulars. Then one day when I thought I saw a break impending I
slipped Mac the word and he sold all they'd let him. I cleared twenty-eight hundred
dollars that day, after giving Mac his rake-off and paying expenses, and I suspect Mac
put down a little bet of his own besides. Less than a month after that, Teller closed his
Hoboken branch. The police got busy. And, anyhow, it didn't pay, though I only traded
there twice. We ran into a crazy bull market when stocks didn't react enough to wipe out
even the one-point margins, and, of course, all the customers were bulls and winning
and pyramiding. No end of bucket shops busted all over the country.
Their game has changed. Trading in the old-fashioned bucket shop had some decided
advantages over speculating in a reputable broker's office. For one thing, the automatic
closing out of your trade when the margin reached the exhaustion point was the best
kind of stop-loss order. You couldn't get stung for more than you had put up, and there
was no danger of rotten execution of orders, and so on. In New York the shops never
were as liberal with their patrons as I've heard they were in the West. Here they used to
limit the possible profit on certain stocks of the football order to two points. Sugar and
Tennessee Coal and Iron were among these. No matter if they moved ten points in ten
minutes you could only make two on one ticket. They figured that otherwise the
customer was getting too big odds; he stood to lose one dollar and to make ten. And then
there were times when all the shops, including the biggest, refused to take orders on
certain stocks. In 1900, on the day before Election Day, when it was a foregone
conclusion that McKinley would win, not a shop in the land let its customers buy stocks.
The election odds were 3 to i on McKinley. By buying stocks on Monday you stood to
make from three to six points or more. A man could bet on Bryan and buy stocks and
make sure money. The bucket shops refused orders that day.
If it hadn't been for their refusing to take my business I never would have stopped
trading in them. And then I never would have learned that there was much more to the
game of stock speculation than to play for fluctuations of a few points.



Chapter III
It takes a man a long time to learn all the lessons of all his mistakes. They say there are
two sides to everything. But there is only one side to the stock market; and it is not the
bull side or the bear side, but the right side. It took me longer to get that general
principle fixed firmly in my mind than it did most of the more technical phases of the
game of stock speculation.
I have heard of people who amuse themselves conducting imaginary operations in the
stock market to prove with imaginary dollars how right they are. Sometimes these ghost
gamblers make millions. It is very easy to be a plunger that way. It is like the old story
of the man who was going to fight a duel the next day.
His second asked him, "Are you a good shot?"
"Well," said the duelist, "I can snap the stem of a wineglass at twenty paces," and he
looked modest.
"That's all very well," said the unimpressed second. "But can you snap the stem of the
wineglass while the wineglass is pointing a loaded pistol straight at your heart?"
With me I must back my opinions with my money. My losses have taught me that I must
not begin to advance until I am sure I shall not have to retreat. But if I cannot advance I
do not move at all. I do not mean by this that a man should not limit his losses when he
is wrong. He should. But that should not breed indecision. All my life I have made
mistakes, but in losing money I have gained experience and accumulated a lot of
valuable don'ts. I have been flat broke several times, but my loss has never been a total
loss. Otherwise, I wouldn't be here now. I always knew I would have another chance and
that I would not make the same mistake a second time. I believed in myself.
A man must believe in himself and his judgment if he expects to make a living at this
game. That is why I don't believe in tips. If I buy stocks on Smith's tip I must sell those
same stocks on Smith's tip. I am depending on him. Suppose Smith is away on a holiday
when the selling time comes around? No, sir, nobody can make big money on what
someone else tells him to do. I know from experience that nobody can give me a tip or a
series of tips that will make more money for me than my own judgment. It took me five
years to learn to play the game intelligently enough to make big money when I was
right.
I didn't have as many interesting experiences as you might imagine. I mean, the process
of learning how to speculate does not seem very dramatic at this distance. I went broke
several times, and that is never pleasant, but the way I lost money is the way everybody
loses money who loses money in Wall Street. Speculation is a hard and trying business,
and a speculator must be on the job all the time or he'll soon have no job to be on.
My task, as I should have known after my early reverses at Fullerton's, was very simple:
To look at speculation from another angle. But I didn't know that there was much more
to the game than I could possibly learn in the bucket shops. There I thought I was
beating the game when in reality I was only beating the shop. At the same time the tapereading
ability that trading in bucket shops developed in me and the training of my
memory have been extremely valuable. Both of these things came easy to me. I owe my
early success as a trader to them and not to brains or knowledge, because my mind was
untrained and my ignorance was colossal. The game taught me the game. And it didn't
spare the rod while teaching.
I remember my very first day in New York. I told you how the bucket shops, by refusing
to take my business, drove me to seek a reputable commission house. One of the boys in
the office where I got my first job was working for Harding Brothers, members of the
New York Stock Exchange. I arrived in this city in the morning, and before one o'clock
that same day I had opened an account with the firm and was ready to trade.
I didn't explain to you how natural it was for me to trade there exactly as I had done in
the bucket shops, where all I did was to bet on fluctuations and catch small but sure
changes in prices. Nobody offered to point out the essential differences or set me right.
If somebody had told me my method would not work I nevertheless would have tried it
out to make sure for myself, for when I am wrong only one thing convinces me of it, and
that is, to lose money. And I am only right when I make money. That is speculating.
They were having some pretty lively times those days and the market was very active.
That always cheers up a fellow. I felt at home right away. There was the old familiar
quotation board in front of me, talking a language that I had learned before I was fifteen
years old. There was a boy doing exactly the same thing I used to do in the first office I
ever worked in. There were the customers same old bunch looking at the board or
standing by the ticket calling out the prices and talking about the market. The machinery
was to all appearances the same machinery that I was used to. The atmosphere was the
atmosphere I had breathed since I had made my first stock-market money $3.12 in
Burlington. The same kind of ticker and the same kind of traders, therefore the same
kind of game. And remember, I was only twenty-two. I suppose I thought I knew the
game from A to Z. Why shouldn't I?
I watched the board and saw something that looked good to me. It was behaving right. I
bought a hundred at 84. I got out at 85 in less than a half hour. Then I saw something
else I liked, and I did the same thing; took three-quarters of a point net within a very
short time. I began well, didn't I?
Now mark this: On that, my first day as a customer of a reputable Stock Exchange
house, and only two hours of it at that, I traded in eleven hundred shares of stock,
jumping in and out. And the net result of the day's operations was that I lost exactly
eleven hundred dollars. That is to say, on my first attempt, nearly one-half of my stake
went up the flue. And remember, some of the trades showed me a profit. But I quit
eleven hundred dollars minus for the day.
It didn't worry me, because I couldn't see where there was anything wrong with me. My
moves, also, were right enough, and if I had been trading in the old Cosmopolitan shop
I'd have broken better than even. That the machine wasn't as it ought to be, my eleven
hundred vanished dollars plainly told me. But as long as the machinist was all right there
was no need to stew. Ignorance at twenty-two isn't a structural defect.
After a few days I said to myself, "I can't trade this way here. The ticker doesn't help as
it should!" But I let it go at that without getting down to bed rock. I kept it up, having
good days and bad days, until I was cleaned out. I went to old Fullerton and got him to
stake me to five hundred dollars. And I came back from St. Louis, as I told you, with
money I took out of the bucket shops there a game I could always beat.
I played more carefully and did better for a while. As soon as I was in easy
circumstances I began to live pretty well. I made friends and had a good time. I was not
quite twenty-three, remember; all alone in New York with easy money in my pockets
and the belief in my heart that I was beginning to understand the new machine.
I was making allowances for the actual execution of my orders on the floor of the
Exchange, and moving more cautiously. But I was still sticking to the tape that is, I was
still ignoring general principles; and as long as I did that I could not spot the exact
trouble with my game.
We ran into the big boom of 1901 and I made a great deal of money that is, for a boy.
You remember those times? The prosperity of the country was unprecedented. We not
only ran into an era of industrial consolidations and combinations of capital that beat
anything we had had up to that time, but the public went stock mad. In previous flush
times, I have heard, Wall Street used to brag of two-hundred-and-fifty-thousand-share
days, when securities of a par value of twenty-five million dollars changed hands. But in
1901 we had a three-million-share day. Everybody was making money. The steel crowd
came to town, a horde of millionaires with no more regard for money than drunken
sailors. The only game that satisfied them was the stock market. We had some of the
biggest high rollers the Street ever saw: John W. Gates, of 'Bet-you-a-million' fame, and
his friends, like John A. Drake, Loyal Smith, and the rest; the Reid-Leeds-Moore crowd,
who sold part of their Steel holdings and with the proceeds bought in the open market
the actual majority of the stock of the great Rock Island system; and Schwab and Frick
and Phipps and the Pittsburgh coterie; to say nothing of scores of men who were lost in
the shuffle but would have been called great plungers at any other time. A fellow could
buy and sell all the stock there was. Keene made a market for the U. S. Steel shares. A
broker sold one hundred thousand shares in a few minutes. A wonderful time! And there
were some wonderful winnings. And no taxes to pay on stock sales! And no day of
reckoning in sight.
Of course, after a while, I heard a lot of calamity howling and the old stagers said
everybody except themselves had gone crazy. But everybody except themselves was
making money. I knew, of course, there must be a limit to the advances and an end to
the crazy buying of A. O. T. Any Old Thing and I got bearish. But every time I sold I
lost money, and if it hadn't been that I ran darn quick I'd have lost a heap more. I looked
for a break, but I was playing safe making money when I bought and chipping it out
when I sold short so that I wasn't profiting by the boom as much as you'd think when
you consider how heavily I used to trade, even as a boy.
There was one stock that I wasn't short of, and that was Northern Pacific. My tape
reading came in handy. I thought most stocks had been bought to a standstill, but Little
Nipper behaved as if it were going still higher. We know now that both the common and
the preferred were being steadily absorbed by the Kuhn-Loeb-Harriman combination.
Well, I was long a thousand shares of Northern Pacific common, and held it against the
advice of everybody in the office. When it got to about 110 I had thirty points profit, and
I grabbed it. It made my balance at my brokers' nearly fifty thousand dollars, the greatest
amount of money I had been able to accumulate up to that time. It wasn't so bad for a
chap who had lost every cent trading in that selfsame office a few months before.
If you remember, the Harriman crowd notified Morgan and Hill of their intention to be
represented in the Burlington-Great Northern-Northern Pacific combination, and then
the Morgan people at first instructed Keene to buy fifty thousand shares of N. P. to keep
the control in their possession. I have heard that Keene told Robert Bacon to make the
order one hundred and fifty thousand shares and the bankers did. At all events, Keene
sent one of his brokers, Eddie Norton, into the N. P. crowd and he bought one hundred
thousand shares of the stock. This was followed by another order, I think, of fifty
thousand shares additional, and the famous corner followed. After the market closed on
May 8, 1901, the whole world knew that a battle of financial giants was on. No two such
combinations of capital had ever opposed each other in this country. Harriman against
Morgan; an irresistible force meeting an immovable object.
There I was on the morning of May ninth with nearly fifty thousand dollars in cash and
no stocks. As I told you, I had been very bearish for some days, and here was my chance
at last. I knew what would happen an awful break and then some wonderful bargains.
There would be a quick recovery and big profits for those who had picked up the
bargains. It didn't take a Sherlock Holmes to figure this out. We were going to have an
opportunity to catch them coming and going, not only for big money but for sure money.
Everything happened as I had foreseen. I was dead right and I lost every cent I had! I
was wiped out by something that was unusual. If the unusual never happened there
would be no difference in people and then there wouldn't be any fun in life. The game
would become merely a matter of addition and subtraction. It would make of us a race of
bookkeepers with plodding minds. It's the guessing that develops a man's brain power.
Just consider what you have to do to guess right.
The market fairly boiled, as I had expected. The transactions were enormous and the
fluctuations unprecedented in extent. I put in a lot of selling orders at the market. When I
saw the opening prices I had a fit, the breaks were so awful. My brokers were on the job.
They were as competent and conscientious as any; but by the time they executed my
orders the stocks had broken twenty points more. The tape was way behind the market
and reports were slow in coming in by reason of the awful rush of business. When I
found out that the stocks I had ordered sold when the tape said the price was, say, 100
and they got mine off at 80, making a total decline of thirty or forty points from the
previous night's close, it seemed to me that I was putting out shorts at a level that made
the stocks I sold the very bargains I had planned to buy. The market was not going to
drop right through to China. So I decided instantly to cover my shorts and go long.
My brokers bought; not at the level that had made me turn, but at the prices prevailing in
the Stock Exchange when their floor man got my orders. They paid an average of fifteen
points more than I had figured on. A loss of thirty-five points in one day was more than
anybody could stand.
The ticker beat me by lagging so far behind the market. I was accustomed to regarding
the tape as the best little friend I had because I bet according to what it told me. But this
time the tape double-crossed me. The divergence between the printed and the actual
prices undid me. It was the sublimation of my previous unsuccess, the selfsame thing
that had beaten me before. It seems so obvious now that tape reading is not enough,
irrespective of the brokers' execution, that I wonder why I didn't then see both my
trouble and the remedy for it.
I did worse than not see it; I kept on trading, in and out, regardless of the execution. You
see, I never could trade with a limit. I must take my chances with the market. That is
what I am trying to beat the market, not the particular price. When I think I should sell, I
sell. When I think stocks will go up, I buy. My adherence to that general principle of
speculation saved me. To have traded at limited prices simply would have been my old
bucket-shop method inefficiently adapted for use in a reputable commission broker's
office. I would never have learned to know what stock speculation is, but would have
kept on betting on what a limited experience told me was a sure thing.
Whenever I did try to limit the prices in order to minimize the disadvantages of trading
at the market when the ticker lagged, I simply found that the market got away from me.
This happened so often that I stopped trying. I can't tell you how it came to take me so
many years to learn that instead of placing piking bets on what the next few quotations
were going to be, my game was to anticipate what was going to happen in a big way.
After my May ninth mishap I plugged along, using a modified but still defective method.
If I hadn't made money some of the time I might have acquired market wisdom quicker.
But I was making enough to enable me to live well. I liked friends and a good time. I
was living down the Jersey Coast that summer, like hundreds of prosperous Wall Street
men. My winnings were not quite enough to offset both my losses and my living
expenses.
I didn't keep on trading the way I did through stubbornness. I simply wasn't able to state
my own problem to myself, and, of course, it was utterly hopeless to try to solve it. I
harp on this topic so much to show what I had to go through before I got to where I
could really make money. My old shotgun and BB shot could not do the work of a highpower
repeating rifle against big game.
Early that fall I not only was cleaned out again but I was so sick of the game I could no
longer beat that I decided to leave New York and try something else some other place. I
had been trading since my fourteenth year. I had made my first thousand dollars when I
was a kid of fifteen, and my first *en thousand before I was twenty-one. I had made and
lost a ten-thousand-dollar stake more than once. In New York I had made thousands and
lost them. I got up to fifty thousand dollars and two days later that went. I had no other
business and knew no other game. After several years I was back where I began. No
worse, for I had acquired habits and a style of living that required money; though that
part didn't bother me as much as being wrong so consistently.



Chapter IV
Well, I went home. But the moment I was back I knew that I had but one mission in life
and that was to get a stake and go back to Wall Street. That was the only place in the
country where I could trade heavily. Some day, when my game was all right, I'd need
such a place. When a man is right he wants to get all that is coming to him for being
right.
I didn't have much hope, but, of course, I tried to get into the bucket shops again. There
were fewer of them and some of them were run by strangers. Those who remembered
me wouldn't give me a chance to show them whether I had gone back as a trader or not. I
told them the truth, that I had lost in New York whatever I had made at home; that I
didn't know as much as I used to think I did; and that there was no reason why it should
not now be good business for them to let me trade with them. But they wouldn't. And the
new places were unreliable. Their owners thought twenty shares was as much as a
gentleman ought to buy if he had any reason to suspect he was going to guess right.
I needed the money and the bigger shops were taking in plenty of it from their regular
customers. I got a friend of mine to go into a certain office and trade. I just sauntered in
to look them over. I again tried to coax the order clerk to accept a small order, even if it
was only fifty shares. Of course he said no. I had rigged up a code with this friend so
that he would buy or sell when and what I told him. But that only made me chicken feed.
Then the office began to grumble about taking my friend's orders. Finally one day he
tried to sell a hundred St. Paul and they shut down on him.
We learned afterward that one of the customers saw us talking together outside and went
in and told the office, and when my friend went up to the order clerk to sell that hundred
St. Paul the guy said:
"We're not taking any selling orders in St. Paul, not from you."
"Why, what's the matter, Joe?" asked my friend.
"Nothing doing, that's all," answered Joe.
"Isn't that money any good? Look it over. It's all there." And my friend passed over the
hundred my hundred in tens. He tried to look indignant and I was looking unconcerned;
but most of the other customers were getting close to the combatants, as they always did
when there was loud talking or the slightest semblance of a scrap between the shop and
any customer. They wanted to get a line on the merits of the case in order to get a line on
the solvency of the concern.
The clerk, Joe, who was a sort of assistant manager, came out from behind his cage,
walked up to my friend, looked at him and then looked at me.
"It's funny," he said slowly "it's damned funny that you never do a single thing here
when your friend Livingston isn't around. You just sit and look at the board by the hour.
Never a peep. But after he comes in you get busy all of a sudden. Maybe you are acting
for yourself; but not in this office any more. We don't fall for Livingston tipping you
off."
Well, that stopped my board money. But I had made a few hundred more than I had
spent and I wondered how I could" use them, for the need of making enough money to
go back to New York with was more urgent than ever. I felt that I would do better the
next time. I had had time to think calmly of some of my foolish plays; and then, one can
see the whole better when one sees it from a little distance. The immediate problem was
to make the new stake.
One day I was in a hotel lobby, talking to some fellows I knew, who were pretty steady
traders. Everybody was talking stock market. I made the remark that nobody could beat
the game on account of the rotten execution he got from his brokers, especially when he
traded at the market, as I did.
A fellow piped up and asked me what particular brokers I meant.
I said, "The best in the land," and he asked who might they be. I could see he wasn't
going to believe I ever dealt with first-class houses.
But I said, "I mean, any member of the New York Stock Exchange. It isn't that they are
crooked or careless, but when a man gives an order to buy at the market he never knows
what that stock is going to cost him until he gets a report from the brokers. There are
more moves of one or two points than of ten or fifteen. But the outside trader can't catch
the small rises or drops because of the execution. I'd rather trade in a bucket shop any
day in the week, if they'd only let a fellow trade big."
The man who had spoken to me I had never seen before. His name was Roberts. He
seemed very friendly disposed. He took me aside and asked me if I had ever traded in
any of the other exchanges, and I said no. He said he knew some houses that were
members of the Cotton Exchange and the Produce Exchange and the smaller stock
exchanges. These firms were very careful and paid special attention to the execution. He
said that they had confidential connections with the biggest and smartest houses on the
New York Stock Exchange and through their personal pull and by guaranteeing a
business of hundreds of thousands of shares a month they got much better service than
an individual customer could get.
"They really cater to the small customer," he said. "They make a specialty of out-oftown
business and they take just as much pains with a ten-share order as they do with
one for ten thousand. They are very competent and honest."
"Yes. But if they pay the Stock Exchange house the regular eighth commission, where
do they come in?"
"Well, they are supposed to pay the eighth. But you know!" He winked at me.
"Yes," I said. "But the one thing a Stock Exchange firm will not do is to split
commissions. The governors wou'i rather a member committed murder, arson and
bigamy than to do business for outsiders for less than a kosher eighth. The very life of
the Stock Exchange depends upon their not violating that one rule."
He must have seen that I had talked with Stock Exchange people, for he said, "Listen!
Every now and then one of those pious Stock Exchange houses is suspended for a year
for violating that rule, isn't it? There are ways and ways of rebating so nobody can
squeal." He probably saw unbelief in my face, for he went on: "And besides, on certain
kind of business we I mean, these wire houses charge a thirty-second extra, in addition
to the eighth commission. They are very nice about it. They never charge the extra
commission except in unusual cases, and then only if the customer has an inactive
account. It wouldn't pay them, you know, otherwise. They aren't in business exclusively
for their health."
By that time I knew he was touting for some phony brokers.
"Do you know any reliable house of that kind?" I asked him.
"I know the biggest brokerage firm in the United States," he said. "I trade there myself.
They have branches in seventy-eight cities in the United States and Canada. They do an
enormous business. And they couldn't very well do it year in and year out if they weren't
strictly on the level, could they?"
"Certainly not," I agreed. "Do they trade in the same stocks that are dealt in on the New
York Stock Exchange?"
"Of course; and on the curb and on any other exchange in this country, or Europe. They
deal in wheat, cotton, provisions ; anything you want. They have correspondents
everywhere and memberships in all the exchanges, either in their own name or on the
quiet."
I knew by that time, but I thought I'd lead him on.
"Yes," I said, "but that does not alter the fact that the orders have to be executed by
somebody, and nobody living can guarantee how the market will be or how close the
ticker's prices are to the actual prices on the floor of the Exchange. By the time a man
gets the quotation here and he hands in an order and it's telegraphed to New York, some
valuable time has gone. I might better go back to New York and lose my money there in
respectable company."
"I don't know anything about losing money; our customers don't acquire that habit. They
make money. We take care of that."
"Your customers?"
"Well, 1 take an interest in the firm, and if I can turn some business their way I do so
because they've always treated me white and I've made a good deal of money through
them. If you wish I'll introduce you to the manager."
"What's the name of the firm?" I asked him.
He told me. I had heard about them. They ran ads in all the papers, calling attention to
the great profits made by those customers who followed their inside information on
active stocks. That was the firm's great specialty. They were not a regular bucket shop,
but bucketeers, alleged brokers who bucketed their orders but nevertheless went through
an elaborate camouflage to convince the world that they were regular brokers engaged in
a legitimate business. They were one of the oldest of that class of firms.
They were the prototype at that time of the same sort of brokers that went broke this
year by the dozen. The general principles and methods were the same, though the
particular devices for fleecing the public differed somewhat, certain details having been
changed when the old tricks became too well known.
These people used to send out tips to buy or sell a certain stock hundreds of telegrams
advising the instant purchase of a certain stock and hundreds recommending other
customers to sell the same stock, on the old racing-tipster plan. Then orders to buy and
sell would come in. The firm would buy and sell, say, a thousand of that stock through a
reputable Stock Exchange firm and get a regular report on it. This report they would
show to any doubting Thomas who was impolite enough to speak about bucketing
customers' orders.
They also used to form discretionary pools in the office and as a great favor allowed
their customers to authorize them, in writing, to trade with the customer's money and in
the customer's name, as they in their judgment deemed best. That way the most
cantankerous customer had no legal redress when his money disappeared. They'd bull a
stock, on paper, and put the customers in and then they'd execute one of the oldfashioned
bucket-shop drives and wipe out hundreds of shoestring margins. They did not
spare anyone, women, schoolteachers and old men being their best bet.
"I'm sore on all brokers," I told the tout. "I'll have to think this over," and I left him so he
wouldn't talk any more to me.
I inquired about this firm. I learned that they had hundreds of customers and although
there were the usual stories I did not find any case of a customer not getting his money
from them if he won any. The difficulty was in finding anybody who had ever won in
that office; but I did. Things seemed to be going their way just then, and that meant that
they probably would not welsh if a trade went against them. Of course most concerns of
that kind eventually go broke. There are times when there are regular epidemics of
bucketeering bankruptcies, like the old-fashioned runs on several banks after one of
them goes up. The customers of the others get frightened and they run to take their
money out. But there are plenty of retired bucket-shop keepers in this country.
Well, I heard nothing alarming about the tout's firm except that they were on the make,
first, last and all the time, and that they were not always truthful. Their specialty was
trimming suckers who wanted to get rich quick. But they always asked their customers'
permission, in writing, to take their rolls away from them.
One chap I met did tell me a story about seeing six hundred telegrams go out one day
advising customers to get aboard a certain stock and six "hundred telegrams to other
customers strongly urging them to sell that same stock, at once.
"Yes, I know the trick," I said to the chap who was telling me.
"Yes," he said. "But the next day they sent telegrams to the same people advising them
to close out their interest in everything and buy or sell another stock. I asked the senior
partner, who was in the office, 'Why do you do that? The first part I understand. Some of
your customers are bound to make money on paper for a while, even if they and the
others eventually lose. But by sending out telegrams like this you simply kill them all.
What's the big idea?''
"Well, he said, the customers are bound to lose their money anyhow, no matter what
they buy, or how or where or when. When they lose their money I lose the customers.
Well, I might as well get as much of their money as I can and then look for a new crop.''
Well, I admit frankly that I wasn't concerned with the business ethics of the firm. I told
you I felt sore on the Teller concern and how it tickled me to get even with them. But I
didn't have any such feeling about this firm. They might be crooks or they might not be
as black as they were painted. I did not propose to let them do any trading for me, or
follow their tips or believe their lies. My one concern was with getting together a stake
and returning to New York to trade in fair amounts in an office where you did not have
to be afraid the police would raid the joint, as they did the bucket shops, or see the postal
authorities swoop down and tie up your money so that you'd be lucky to get eight cents
on the dollar a year and a half later.
Anyhow, I made up my mind that I would see what trading advantages of this firm
offered over what you might call the legitimate brokers. I didn't have much money to put
up as margin, and firms that bucketed orders were naturally much more liberal in that
respect, so that a few hundred dollars went much further in their offices.
I went down to their place and had a talk with the manager himself. When he found out
that I was an old trader and had formerly had accounts in New York with Stock
Exchange houses and that I had lost all I took with me he stopped promising to make a
million a minute for me if I let them invest my savings. He figured that I was a
permanent sucker, the ticker-hound kind that always plays and always loses; a steadyincome
provider for brokers, whether they were the kind that bucket your orders or
modestly content themselves with the commissions.
I just told the manager that what I was looking for was decent execution, because I
always traded at the market and I didn't want to get reports that showed a difference of a
half or a whole point from the ticker price.
He assured me on his word of honor that they would do whatever I thought was right.
They wanted my business because they wanted to show me what high-class brokering
was. They had in their employ the best talent in the business. In fact, they were famous
for their execution. If there was any difference between the ticker price and the report it
was always in favor of the customer, though of course they didn't guarantee that. If I
opened an account with them I could buy and sell at the price which came over the wire,
they were so confident of their brokers.
Naturally that meant that I could trade there to all intents and purposes as though I were
in a bucket shop that is, they'd let me trade at the next quotation. I didn't want to appear
too anxious, so I shook my head and told him I guessed I wouldn't open an account that
day, but I'd let him know. He urged me strongly to begin right away as it was a good
market to make money in. It was for them; a dull market with prices seesawing slightly,
just the kind to get customers in and then wipe them out with a sharp drive in the tipped
stock. I had some trouble in getting away.
I had given him my name and address, and that very same day I began to get prepaid
telegrams and letters urging me to get aboard of some stock or other in which they said
they knew an inside pool was operating for a fifty-point rise.
I was busy going around and finding out all I could about several other brokerage
concerns of the same bucketing kind. It seemed to me that if I could be sure of getting
my winnings out of their clutches the only way of my getting together some real money
was to trade in these near bucket-shops.
When I had learned all I could I opened accounts with three firms. I had taken a small
office and had direct wires run to the three brokers.
I traded in a small way so they wouldn't get frightened off at the very start. I made
money on balance and they were not slow in telling me that they expected real business
from customers who had direct wires to their offices. They did not hanker for pikers.
They figured that the more I did the more I'd lose, and the more quickly I was wiped out
the more they'd make. It was a sound enough theory when you consider that these
people necessarily dealt with averages and the average customer was never long-lived,
financially speaking. A busted customer can't trade. A half-crippled customer can whine
and insinuate things and make trouble of one or another kind that hurts business.
I also established a connection with a local firm that had a direct wire to its New York
correspondent, who were also members of the New York Stock Exchange. I had a stock
ticker put in and I began to trade conservatively. As I told you, it was pretty much like
trading in bucket shops, only it was a little slower.
It was a game that I could beat, and I did. I never got it down to such a fine point that I
could win ten times out of ten; but I won on balance, taking it week in and week out. I
was again living pretty well, but always saving something, to increase the stake that I
was to take back to Wall Street. I got a couple of wires into two more of these bucketing
brokerage houses, making five in all and, of course, my good firm.
There were times when my plans went wrong and my stocks did not run true to form,
but did the opposite of what they should have done if they had kept up their regard for
precedent. But they did not hit me very hard they couldn't, with my shoestring margins.
My relations with my brokers were friendly enough. Their accounts and records did not
always agree with mine, and the differences uniformly happened to be against me.
Curious coincidence not! But I fought for my own and usually had my way in the end.
They always had the hope of getting away from me what I had taken from them. They
regarded my winnings as temporary loans, I think.
They really were not sporty, being in the business to make money by hook or by crook
instead of being content with the house percentage. Since suckers always lose money
when they gamble in stocks they never really speculate you'd think these fellows would
run what you might call a legitimate illegitimate business. But they didn't. "Copper your
customers and grow rich" is an old and true adage, but they did not seem ever to have
heard of it and didn't stop at plain bucketing., Several times they tried to double-cross
me with the old tricks. They caught me a couple of times because I wasn't looking. They
always did that when I had taken no more than my usual line. I accused them of being
short sports or worse, but they denied it and it ended by -my going back to trading as
usual. The beauty of doing business with a crook is that he always forgives you for
catching-him, so long as you don't stop doing business with him. It's all right as far as he
is concerned. He is willing to meet you more than halfway. Magnanimous souls!
Well, I made up my mind that I couldn't afford to have the normal rate of increase of my
stake impaired by crooks' tricks, so I decided to teach them a lesson. I picked out some
stock that after having been a speculative favorite had become inactive. Water-logged. If
I had taken one that never had been active they would have suspected my play. I gave
out buying orders on this stock to my five bucketeering brokers. When the orders were
taken and they were waiting for the next quotation to come out on the tape I sent in an
order through my Stock Exchange house to sell a hundred shares of that particular stock
at the market. I urgently asked for quick action. Well, you can imagine what happened
when the selling order got to the floor of the Exchange; a dull inactive stock that a
commission house with out-of-town connections wanted to sell in a hurry. Somebody
got cheap stock. But the transaction as it would be printed on the tape was the price that
I would pay on my five buying orders. I was long on balance four hundred shares of that
stock at a low figure. The wire house asked me what I'd heard, and I said I had a tip on
it. Just before the close of the market I sent an order to my reputable house to buy back
that hundred shares, and not waste any time; that I didn't want to be short under any
circumstances; and I didn't care what they paid. So they wired to New York and the
order to buy that hundred quick resulted in a sharp advance. I of course had put in
selling orders for the five hundred shares that my friends had bucketed. It worked very
satisfactorily.
Still, they didn't mend their ways, and so I worked that trick on them several times. I did
not dare punish them as severely as they deserved, seldom more than a point or two on a
hundred shares. But it helped to swell my little hoard that I was saving for my next Wall
Street venture. I sometimes varied the process by selling some stock short, without
overdoing it. I was satisfied with my six or eight hundred clear for each crack.
One day the stunt worked so well that it went far beyond all calculations for a ten-point
swing. I wasn't looking for it. As a matter of fact it so happened that I had two hundred
shares instead of my usual hundred at one broker's, though only a hundred in the four
other shops. That was too much of a good thing for them. They were sore as pups about
it and they began to say things over the wires. So I went and saw the manager, the same
man who had been so anxious to get my account, and so forgiving every time I caught
him trying to put something over on me. He talked pretty big for a man in his position.
"That was a fictitious market for that stock, and we won't pay you a damned cent!" he
swore.
"It wasn't a fictitious market when you accepted my order to buy. You let me in then, all
right, and now you've got to let me out. You can't get around that for fairness, can you?"
"Yes, I can!" he yelled. "I can prove that somebody put up a job."
"Who put up a job?" I asked.
"Somebody!"
"Who did they put it up on?" I asked.
"Some friends of yours were in it as sure as pop," he said.
But I told him, "You know very well that I play a lone hand. Everybody in this town
knows that. They've known it ever since I started trading in stocks. Now I want to give
you some friendly advice: you just send and get that money for me. I don't want to be
disagreeable. Just do what I tell you."
"I won't pay it. It was a rigged-up transaction," he yelled.
I got tired of his talk. So I told him: "You'll pay it to me right now and here."
Well, he blustered a little more and accused me flatly of being the guilty thimblerigger;
but he finally forked over the cash. The others were not so rambunctious. In one office
the manager had been studying these inactive-stock plays of mine and when he got my
order he actually bought the stock for me and then some for himself in the Little Board,
and he made some money. These fellows didn't mind being sued by customers on
charges of fraud, as they generally had a good technical legal defense ready. But they
were afraid I'd attach the furniture the money in the bank I couldn't because they took
care not to have any funds exposed to that danger. It would not hurt them to be known as
pretty sharp, but to get a reputation for welshing was fatal. For a customer to lose money
at his broker's is no rare event. But for a customer to make money and then not get it is
the worst crime on the speculators' statute books.
I got my money from all; but that ten-point jump put an end to the pleasing pastime of
skinning skinners. They were on the lookout for the little trick that they themselves had
used to defraud hundreds of poor customers. I went back to my regular trading; but the
market wasn't always right for my system that is, limited as I was by the size of the
orders they would take, I couldn't make a killing.
I had been at it over a year, during which I used every device that I could think of to
make money trading in those wire houses. I had lived very comfortably, bought an
automobile and didn't limit myself about my expenses. I had to make a stake, but I also
had to live while I was doing it. If my position on the market was right I couldn't spend
as much as I made, so that I'd always be saving some. If I was wrong I didn't make any
money and therefore couldn't spend. As I said, I had saved up a fair-sized roll, and there
wasn't so much money to be made in the five wire houses; so I decided to return to New
York.
I had my own automobile and I invited a friend of mine who also was a trader to motor
to New York with me. He accepted and we started. We stopped at New Haven for
dinner. At the hotel I met an old trading acquaintance, and among other things he told
me there was a shop in town that had a wire and was doing a pretty good business.
We left the hotel on our way to New York, but I drove by the street where the bucket
shop was to see what the outside looked like. We found it and couldn't resist the
temptation to stop and have a look at the inside. It wasn't very sumptuous, but the old
blackboard was there, and the customers, and the game was on.
The manager was a chap who looked as if he had been an actor or a stump speaker. He
was very impressive. He'd say good morning as though he had discovered the morning's
goodness after ten years of searching for it with a microscope and was making you a
present of the discovery as well as of the sky, the sun and the firm's bank roll. He saw us
come up in the sporty-looking automobile, and as both of us were young and careless I
don't suppose I looked twenty he naturally concluded we were a couple of Yale boys. I
didn't tell him we weren't. He didn't give me a chance, but began delivering a speech. He
was very glad to see us. Would we have a comfortable seat? The market, we would find,
was philanthropically inclined that morning; in fact, clamoring to increase the supply of
collegiate pocket money, of which no intelligent undergraduate ever had a sufficiency
since the dawn of historic time. But here and now, by the beneficence of the ticker, a
small initial investment would return thousands. More pocket money than anybody
could spend was what the stock market yearned to yield.
Well, I thought it would be a pity not to do as the nice man of the bucket shop was so
anxious to have us do, so I told him I would do as he wished, because I had heard that
lots of people made lots of money in the stock market.
I began to trade, very conservatively, but increasing the line as I won. My friend
followed me.
We stayed overnight in New Haven and the next morning found us at the hospitable
shop at five minutes to ten. The orator was glad to see us, thinking his turn would cony
day. But I cleaned up within a few dollars of fifteen hundred. The next morning when
we dropped in on the great orator, and handed him an order to sell five hundred Sugar he
hesitated, but finally accepted it in silence! The stock broke over a point and I closed out
and gave him the ticket. There was exactly five hundred dollars coming to me in profits,
and my five hundred dollar margin. He took twenty fifties from the safe, counted them
three times very slowly, then he counted them again in front of me. It looked as if his
fingers were sweating mucilage the way the notes seemed to stick to him, but finally he
handed the money to me. He folded his arms, bit his lower lip, kept it bit, and stared at
the top of a window behind me.
I told him I'd like to sell two hundred Steel. But he never stirred. He didn't hear me. I
repeated my wish, only I made it three hundred shares. He turned his head. I waited for
the speech. But all he did was to look at me. Then he smacked his lips and swallowed as
if he was going to start an attack on fifty years of political misrule by the unspeakable
grafters of the opposition.
Finally he waved his hand toward the yellow-backs in my hand and said, "Take away
that bauble!"
"Take away what?" I said. I hadn't quite understood what he was driving at.
"Where are you going, student?" He spoke very impressively.
"New York," I told him.
"That's right," he said, nodding about twenty times. "That is ex-actly right. You are
going away from here all right, because now I know two things two, student! I know
what you are not, and I know what you are. Yes! Yes! Yes!"
"Is that so?" I said very politely.
"Yes. You two " He paused; and then he stopped being in Congress and snarled: "You
two are the biggest sharks in the United States of America! Students? Ye-eh! You must
be Freshmen! Ye-eh!"
We left him talking to himself. He probably didn't mind the money so much. No
professional gambler does. It's all in the game and the luck's bound to turn. It was his
being fooled in us that hurt his pride.
That is how I came back to Wall Street for a third attempt. I had been studying, of
course, trying to locate the exact trouble with my system that had been responsible for
my defeats in A. R. Fullerton & Co.'s office. I was twenty when I made my first ten
thousand, and I lost that. But I knew how and why because I traded out of season all the
time; because when I couldn't play according to my system, which was based on study
and experience, I went in and gambled. I hoped to win, instead of knowing that I ought
to win on form. When I was about twenty-two I ran up my stake to fifty thousand
dollars; I lost it on May ninth. But I knew exactly why and how. It was the laggard tape
and the unprecedented violence of the movements that awful day. But I didn't know why
I had lost after my return from St. Louis or after the May ninth panic. I had theories that
is, remedies for some of the faults that I thought I found in my play. But I needed actual
practice
There is nothing like losing all you have in the world for teaching you what not to do.
And when you know what not to do in order not to lose money, you begin to learn what
to do in order to win. Did you get that? You begin to learn!



Chapter V
The average ticker hound or, as they used to call him, tape-worm goes wrong, I suspect,
as much from over-specialization as from anything else. It means a highly expensive
inelasticity. After all, the game of speculation isn't all mathematics or set rules, however
rigid the main laws may be. Even in my tape reading something enters that is more than
mere arithmetic. There is what I call the behavior of a stock, actions that enable you to
judge whether or not it is going to proceed in accordance with the precedents that your
observation has noted. If a stock doesn't act right don't touch it; because, being unable to
tell precisely what is wrong, you cannot tell which way it is going. No diagnosis, no
prognosis. No prognosis, no profit.
It is a very old thing, this of noting the behavior of a stock and studying its past
performances. When I first came to New York there was a broker's office where a
Frenchman used to talk about his chart. At first I thought he was a sort of pet freak kept
by the firm because they were good-natured. Then I learned that he was a persuasive and
most impressive talker. He said that the only thing that didn't lie because it simply
couldn't was mathematics. By means of his curves he could forecast market movements.
Also he could analyse them, and tell, for instance, why Keene did the right thing in his
famous Atchison preferred bull manipulation, and later why he went wrong in his
Southern Pacific pool. At various times one or another of the professional traders tried
the Frenchman's system and then went back to their old unscientific methods of making
a living. Their hit-or-miss system was cheaper, they said. I heard that the Frenchman
said Keene admitted that the chart was 100 per cent right but claimed that the method
was too slow for practical use in an active market.
Then there was one office where a chart of the daily movement of prices was kept. It
showed at a glance just what each stock had done for months. By comparing individual
curves with the general market curve and keeping in mind certain rules the customers
could tell whether the stock on which they got an unscientific tip to buy was fairly
entitled to a rise. They used the chart as a sort of complementary tipster. To-day there
are scores of commission houses where you find trading charts. They come ready-made
from the offices of statistical experts and include not only stocks but commodities.
"I should say that a chart helps those who can read it or rather who can assimilate what
they read. The average chart reader, however, is apt to become obsessed with the notion
that the dips and peaks and primary and secondary movements are all there is to stock
speculation. If he pushes his confidence to its logical limit he is bound to go broke.
There is an extremely able man, a former partner of a well-known Stock Exchange
house, who is really a trained mathematician. He is a graduate of a famous technical
school. He devised charts based upon a very careful and minute study of the behaviour
of prices in many markets stocks, bonds, grain, cotton, money, and so on. He went back
years and years and traced the correlations and seasonal movements oh, everything. He
used his charts in his stock trading for years. What he really did was to take advantage of
some highly intelligent averaging. They tell me he won regularly until the World War
knocked all precedents into a cocked hat. I heard that he and his large following lost
millions before they desisted. But not even a world war can keep the stock market from
being a bull market when conditions are bullish, or a bear market when conditions are
bearish. And all a man needs to know to make money is to appraise conditions.
I didn't mean to get off the track like that, but I can't help it when I think of my first few
years in Wall Street. I know now what I did not know then, and I think of the mistakes
of my ignorance because those are the very mistakes that the average stock speculator
makes year in and year out.
After I got back to New York to try for the third time to beat the market in a Stock
Exchange house I traded quite actively. I didn't expect to do as well as I did in the
bucket shops, but I thought that after a while I would do much better because I would be
able to swing a much heavier line. Yet, I can see now that my main trouble was my
failure to grasp the vital difference between stock gambling and stock speculation. Still,
by reason of my seven years' experience in reading the tape and a certain natural
aptitude for the game, my stake was earning not indeed a fortune but a very high rate of
interest. I won and lost as before, but I was winning on balance. The more I made the
more I spent. This is the usual experience with most men. No, not necessarily with easymoney
pickers, but with every human being who is not a slave of the hoarding instinct.
Some men, like old Russell Sage, have the money-making and the money-hoarding
instinct equally well developed, and of course they die disgustingly rich.
The game of beating the market exclusively interested me from ten to three every day,
and after three, the game of living my life. Don't misunderstand me. I never allowed
pleasure to interfere with business. When I lost it was because I was wrong and not
because I was suffering from dissipation or excesses. There never were any shattered
nerves or rum-shaken limbs to spoil my game. I couldn't afford anything that kept me
from feeling physically and mentally fit. Even now I am usually in bed by ten. As a
young man I never kept late hours, because I could not do business properly on
insufficient sleep. I was doing better than breaking even and that is why I didn't think
there was any need to deprive myself of the good things of life. The market was always
there to supply them. I was acquiring the confidence that comes to a man from a
professionally dispassionate attitude toward his own method of providing bread and
butter for himself.
The first change I made in my play was in the matter of time. I couldn't wait for the sure
thing to come along and then take a point or two out of it as I could in the bucket shops.
I had to start much earlier if I wanted to catch the move in Fullerton's office. In other
words, I had to study what was going to happen; to anticipate stock movements. That
sounds asininely commonplace, but you know what I mean. It was the change in my
own attitude toward the game that was of supreme importance to me. It taught me, little
by little, the essential difference between betting on fluctuations and anticipating
inevitable advances and declines, between gambling and speculating.
I had to go further back than an hour in my studies of the market which was something I
never would have learned to do in the biggest bucket shop in the world. I interested
myself in trade reports and railroad earnings and financial and commercial statistics. Of
course I loved to trade heavily and they called me the Boy Plunger; but I also liked to
study the moves. I never thought that anything was irksome if it helped me to trade more
intelligently. Before I can solve a problem I must state it to myself. When I think I have
found the solution I must prove I am right. I know of only one way to prove it; and that
is, with my own money.
Slow as my progress seems now, I suppose I learned as fast as I possibly could,
considering that I was making money on balance. If I had lost oftener perhaps it might
have spurred me to more continuous study. I certainly would have had more mistakes to
spot. But I am not sure of the exact value of losing, for if I had lost more I would have
lacked the money to test out the improvements in my methods of trading.
Studying my winning plays in Fullerton's office I discovered that although I often was
100 per cent right on the market that is, in my diagnosis of conditions and general trend I
was not making as much money as my market "tightness" entitled me to. Why wasn't I?
There was as much to learn from partial victory as from defeat.
For instance, I had been bullish from the very start of a bull market, and I had backed
my opinion by buying stocks. An advance followed, as I had clearly foreseen. So far, all
very well. But what else did I do? Why, I listened to the elder statesmen and curbed my
youthful impetuousness. I made up my mind to be wise and play carefully,
conservatively. Everybody knew that the way to do that was to take profits and buy back
your stocks on reactions. And that is precisely what I did, or rather what I tried to do; for
I often took profits and waited for a reaction that never came. And I saw my stock go
kiting up ten points more and I sitting there with my four-point profit safe in my
conservative pocket. They say you never grow poor taking profits. No, you don't. But
neither do you grow rich taking a four-point profit in a bull market.
Where I should have made twenty thousand dollars I made two thousand. That was what
my conservatism did for me. About the time I discovered what a small percentage of
what I should have made I was getting I discovered something else, and that is that
suckers differ among themselves according to the degree of experience.
The tyro knows nothing, and everybody, including himself, knows it. But the next, or
second, grade thinks he knows a great deal and makes others feel that way too. He is the
experienced sucker, who has studied not the market itself but a few remarks about the
market made by a still higher grade of suckers. The second-grade sucker knows how to
keep from losing his money in some of the ways that get the raw beginner. It is this
semisucker rather than the 100 per cent article who is the real all-the-year-round support
of the commission houses. He lasts about three and a half years on an average, as
compared with a single season of from three to thirty weeks, which is the usual Wall
Street life of a first offender. It is naturally the semisucker who is always quoting the
famous trading aphorisms and the various rules of the game. He knows all the don'ts that
ever fell from the oracular lips of the old stagers excepting the principal one, which is:
Don't be a sucker!
This semisucker is the type that thinks he has cut his wisdom teeth because he loves to
buy on declines. He waits for them. He measures his bargains by the number of points it
has sold off from the top. In big bull markets the plain unadulterated sucker, utterly
ignorant of rules and precedents, buys blindly because he hopes blindly. He makes most
of the money until one of the healthy reactions takes it away from him at one fell swoop.
But the Careful Mike sucker does what I did when I thought I was playing the game
intelligently according to the intelligence of others. I knew I needed to change my
bucket-shop methods and I thought I was solving my problem with any change,
particularly one that assayed high gold values according to the experienced traders
among the customers.
Most -let us call 'em customers -are alike. You find very few who can truthfully say that
Wall Street doesn't owe them money. In Fullerton's there were the usual crowd. All
grades! Well, there was one old chap who was not like the others. To begin with, he was
a much older man. Another thing was that he never volunteered advice and never
bragged of his winnings. He was a great hand for listening very attentively to the others.
He did not seem very keen to get tips that is, he never asked the talkers what they'd
heard or what they knew. But when somebody gave him one he always thanked the
tipster very politely. Sometimes he thanked the tipster again when the tip turned out
O.K. But if it went wrong he never whined, so that nobody could tell whether he
followed it or let it slide by. It was a legend of the office that the old jigger was rich and
could swing quite a line. But he wasn't donating much to the firm in the way of
commissions; at least not that anyone could see. His name was Partridge, but they
nicknamed him Turkey behind his back, because he was so thick-chested and had a habit
of strutting about the various rooms, with the point of his chin resting on his breast.
The customers, who were all eager to be shoved and forced into doing things so as to lay
the blame for failure on others, used to go to old Partridge and tell him what some friend
of a friend of an insider had advised them to do in a certain stock. They would tell him
what they had not done with the tip so he would tell them what they ought to do. But
whether the tip they had was to buy or to sell, the old chap's answer was always the
same.
The customer would finish the tale of his perplexity and then ask: "What do you think I
ought to do?"
Old Turkey would cock his head to one side, contemplate his fellow customer with a
fatherly smile, and finally he would say very impressively, "You know, it's a bull
market!"
Time and again I heard him say, "Well, this is a bull market, you know!" as though he
were giving to you a priceless talisman wrapped up in a million-dollar accidentinsurance
policy. And of course I did not get his meaning.
One day a fellow named Elmer Harwood rushed into the office, wrote out an order and
gave it to the clerk. Then he rushed over to where Mr. Partridge was listening politely to
John Fanning's story of the time he overheard Keene give an order to one of his brokers
and all that John made was a measly three points on a hundred shares and of course the
stock had to go up twenty-four points in three days right after John sold out. It was at
least the fourth time that John had told him that tale of woe, but old Turkey was smiling
as sympathetically as if it was the first time he heard it.
Well, Elmer made for the old man and, without a word of apology to John Fanning, told
Turkey, "Mr. Partridge, I have just sold my Climax Motors. My people say the market is
entitled to a reaction and that I'll be able to buy it back cheaper. So you'd better do
likewise. That is, if you've still got yours."
Elmer looked suspiciously at the man to whom he had given the original tip to buy. The
amateur, or gratuitous, tipster always thinks he owns the receiver of his tip body and
soul, even before he knows how the tip is going to turn out.
"Yes, Mr. Harwood, I still have it. Of course!" said Turkey gratefully. It was nice of
Elmer to think of the old chap. "Well, now is the time to take your profit and get in again
on the next dip," said Elmer, as if he had just made out the deposit slip for the old man.
Failing to perceive enthusiastic gratitude in the beneficiary's face Elmer went on: "I have
just sold every share I owned!"
From his voice and manner you would have conservatively estimated it at ten thousand
shares. But Mr. Partridge shook his head regretfully and whined, "No! No! I can't do
that!"
"What?" yelled Elmer.
"I simply can't!" said Mr. Partridge. He was in great trouble.
"Didn't I give you the tip to buy it?"
"You did, Mr. Harwood, and I am very grateful to you. Indeed, I am, sir. But "
"Hold on! Let me talk! And didn't that stock go op seven points in ten days? Didn't it?"
"It did, and I am much obliged to you, my dear boy. But I couldn't think of selling that
stock."
"You couldn't?" asked Elmer, beginning to look doubtful himself. It is a habit with most
tip givers to be tip takers.
"No, I couldn't."
"Why not?" And Elmer drew nearer.
"Why, this is a bull market!" The old fellow said it as though he had given a long and
detailed explanation.
"That's all right," said Elmer, looking angry because of his disappointment. "I know this
is a bull market as well as you do. But you'd better slip them that stock of yours and buy
it back on the reaction. You might as well reduce the cost to yourself."
"My dear boy," said old Partridge, in great distress "my dear boy, if I sold that stock now
I'd lose my position; and then where would I be?"
Elmer Harwood threw up his hands, shook his head and walked over to me to get
sympathy: "Can you beat it?" he asked me in a stage whisper. "I ask you 1"
I didn't say anything. So he went on: "I give him a tip on Climax Motors. He buys five
hundred shares. He's got seven points' profit and I advise him to get out and buy 'em
back on the reaction that's overdue even now. And what does he say when I tell him? He
says that if he sells he'll lose his job. What do you know about that?"
"I beg your pardon, Mr. Harwood; I didn't say I'd lose my job," cut in old Turkey. "I said
I'd lose my position. And when you are as old as I am and you've been through as many
booms and panics as I have, you'll know that to lose your position is something nobody
can afford; not even John D. Rockefeller. I hope the stock reacts and that you will be
able to repurchase your line at a substantial concession, sir. But I myself can only trade
in accordance with the experience of many years. I paid a high price for it and I don't
feel like throwing away a second tuition fee. But I am as much obliged to you as if I had
the money in the bank. It's a bull market, you know." And he strutted away, leaving
Elmer dazed.
What old Mr. Partridge said did not mean much to me until I began to think about my
own numerous failures to make as much money as I ought to when I was so right on the
general market. The more I studied the more I realized how wise that old chap was. He
had evidently suffered from the same defect in his young days and knew his own human
weaknesses. He would not lay himself open to a temptation that experience had taught
him was hard to resist and had always proved expensive to him, as it was to me.
I think it was a long step forward in my trading education when I realized at last that
when old Mr. Partridge kept on telling the other customers, "Well, you know this is a
bull market!" he really meant to tell them that the big money was not in the individual
fluctuations but in the main movements that is, not in reading the tape but in sizing up
the entire market and its trend.
And right here let me say one thing: After spending many years in Wall Street and after
making and losing millions of dollars I want to tell you this: It never was my thinking
that made the big money for me. It always was my sitting. Got that? My sitting tight! It
is no trick at all to be right on the market. You always find lots of early bulls in bull
markets and early bears in bear markets. I've known many men who were right at
exactly the right time, and began buying or selling stocks when prices were at the very
level which should show the greatest profit. And their experience invariably matched
mine that is, they made no real money out of it. Men who can both be right and sit tight
are uncommon. I found it one of the hardest things to learn. But it is only after a stock
operator has firmly grasped this that he can make big money. It is literally true that
millions come easier to a trader after he knows how to trade than hundreds did in the
days of his ignorance.
The reason is that a man may see straight and clearly and yet become impatient or
doubtful when the market takes its time about doing as he figured it must do. That is
why so many men in Wall Street, who are not at all in the sucker class, not even in the
third grade, nevertheless lose money. The market does not beat them. They beat
themselves, because though they have brains they cannot sit tight. Old Turkey was dead
right in doing and saying what he did. He had not only the courage of his convictions but
the intelligent patience to sit tight.
Disregarding the big swing and trying to jump in and out was fatal to me. Nobody can
catch all the fluctuations. In a bull market your game is to buy and hold until you believe
that the bull market is near its end. To do this you must study general conditions and not
tips or special factors affecting individual stocks. Then get out of all your stocks; get out
for keeps! Wait until you see or if you prefer, until you think you see the turn of the
market; the beginning of a reversal of general conditions. You have to use your brains
and your vision to do this; otherwise my advice would be as idiotic as to tell you to buy
cheap and sell dear. One of the most helpful things that anybody can learn is to give up
trying to catch the last eighth or the first. These two are the most expensive eighths in
the world. They have cost stock traders, in the aggregate, enough millions of dollars to
build a concrete highway across the continent.
Another thing I noticed in studying my plays in Fullerton's office after I began to trade
less unintelligently was that my initial operations seldom showed me a loss. That
naturally made me decide to start big. It gave me confidence in my own judgment before
I allowed it to be vitiated by the advice of others or even by my own impatience at
times. Without faith in his own judgment no man can go very far in this game. That is
about all I have learned to study general conditions, to take a position and stick to it. I
can wait without a twinge of impatience. I can see a setback without being shaken,
knowing that it is only temporary. I have been short one hundred thousand shares and I
have seen a big rally coming. I have figured and figured correctly that such a rally as I
felt was inevitable, and even wholesome, would make a difference of one million dollars
in my paper profits. And I nevertheless have stood pat and seen half my paper profit
wiped out, without once considering the advisability of covering my shorts to put them
out again on the rally. I knew that if I did I might lose my position and with it the
certainty of a big killing. It is the big swing that makes the big money for you.
If I learned all this so slowly it was because I learned by my mistakes, and some time
always elapses between making a mistake and realizing it, and more time between
realizing it and exactly determining it. But at the same time I was faring pretty
comfortably and was very young, so that I made up in other ways. Most of my winnings
were still made in part through my tape reading because the kind of markets we were
having lent themselves fairly well to my method. I was not losing either as often or as
irritatingly as in the beginning of my New York experiences. It wasn't anything to be
proud of, when you think that I had been broke three times in less than two years. And
as I told you, being broke is a very efficient educational agency.
I was not increasing my stake very fast because I lived up to the handle all the time. I did
not deprive myself of many of the things that a fellow of my age and tastes would want.
I had my own automobile and I could not see any sense in skimping on living when I
was taking it out of the market. The ticker only stopped Sundays and holidays, which
was as it should be. Every time I found the reason for a loss or the why and how of
another mistake, I added a brand-new Don't! to my schedule of assets. And the nicest
way to capitalize my increasing assets was by not cutting down on my living expenses.
Of course I had some amusing experiences and some that were not so amusing, but if I
told them all in detail I'd never finish. As a matter of fact, the only incidents that I
remember without special effort are those that taught me something of definite value to
me in my trading; something that added to my store of knowledge of the game and of
myself!



Chapter VI
In the spring of 1906 I was in Atlantic City for a short vacation. I was out of stocks and
was thinking only of having a change of air and a nice rest. By the way, I had gone back
to my first brokers, Harding Brothers, and my account had got to be pretty active. I
could swing three or four thousand shares. That wasn't much more than I had done in the
old Cosmopolitan shop when I was barely twenty years of age. But there was some
difference between my one-point margin in the bucket shop and the margin required by
brokers who actually bought or sold stocks for my account on the New York Stock
Exchange.
You may remember the story I told you about that time when I was short thirty-five
hundred Sugar in the Cosmopolitan and I had a hunch something was wrong and I'd
better close the trade? Well, I have often had that curious feeling. As a rule, I yield to it.
But at times I have pooh-poohed the idea and have told myself that it was simply asinine
to follow any of these sudden blind impulses to reverse my position. I have ascribed my
hunch to a state of nerves resulting from too many cigars or insufficient sleep or a torpid
liver or something of that kind. When I have argued myself into disregarding my
impulse and have stood pat I have always had cause to regret it. A dozen instances occur
to me when I did not sell as per hunch, and the next day I'd go downtown and the market
would be strong, or perhaps even advance, and I'd tell myself how silly it would have
been to obey the blind impulse to sell. But on the following day there would be a pretty
bad drop. Something had broken loose somewhere and I'd have made money by not
being so wise and logical. The reason plainly was not physiological but psychological.
I want to tell you only about one of them because of what it did for me. It happened
when I was having that little vacation in Atlantic City in the spring of 1906. I had a
friend with me who also was a customer of Harding Brothers. I had no interest in the
market one way or another and was enjoying my rest. I can always give up trading to
play, unless of course it is an exceptionally active market in which my commitments are
rather heavy. It was a bull market, as I remember it. The outlook was favorable for
general business and the stock market had slowed down but the tone was firm and all
indications pointed to higher prices.
One morning after we had breakfasted and had finished reading all the New York
morning papers, and had got tired of watching the sea gulls picking up clams and flying
up with them twenty feet in the air and dropping them on the hard wet sand to open them
for their breakfast, my friend and I started up the Boardwalk. That was the most exciting
thing we did in the daytime.
It was not noon yet, and we walked up slowly to kill time and breathe the salt air.
Harding Brothers had a branch office on the Boardwalk and we used to drop in every
morning and see how they'd opened. It was more force of habit than anything else, for I
wasn't doing anything.
The market, we found, was strong and active. My friend, who was quite bullish, was
carrying a moderate line purchased several points lower. He began to tell me what an
obviously wise thing it was to hold stocks for much higher prices. I wasn't paying
enough attention to him to take the trouble to agree with him. I was looking over the
quotation board, noting the changes they were mostly advances until I came to Union
Pacific. I got a feeling that I ought to sell it. I can't tell you more. I just felt like selling it.
I asked myself why I should feel like that, and I couldn't find any reason whatever for
going short of UP.
I stared at the last price on the board until I couldn't see any figures or any board or
anything else, for that
matter. All I knew was that I wanted to sell Union Pacific and I couldn't find out why I
wanted to. I must have looked queer, for my friend, who was standing alongside of me,
suddenly nudged me and asked, "Hey, what's the matter?"
"I don't know," I answered.
"Going to sleep?" he said.
"No," I said. "I am not going to sleep. What I am going to do is to sell that stock." I had
always made money following my hunches. I walked over to a table where there were
some blank order pads. My friend followed me. I wrote out an order to sell a thousand
Union Pacific at the market and handed it to the manager. He was smiling when I wrote
it and when he took it. But when he read the order he stopped smiling and looked at me.
"Is this right?" he asked me. But I just looked at him and he rushed it over to the
operator. "What are you doing?" asked my friend.
"I'm selling it!" I told him.
"Selling what?" he yelled at me. If he was a bull how could I be a bear? Something was
wrong.
"A thousand UP," I said.
"Why?" he asked me in great excitement.
I shook my head, meaning I had no reason. But he must have thought I'd got a tip,
because he took me by the arm and led me outside into the hall, where we could be out
of sight and hearing of the other customers and rubbering chair-warmers.
"What did you hear?" he asked me. He was quite excited. UP. was one of his pets and he
was bullish on it because of its earnings and its prospects. But he was willing to take a
bear tip on it at second hand. "Nothing!" I said.
"You didn't?" He was skeptical and showed it plainly.
"I didn't hear a thing."
"Then why in blazes are you selling?"
"I don't know," I told him. I spoke gospel truth.
"Oh, come across, Larry," he said.
He knew it was my habit to know why I traded. I had sold a thousand shares of Union
Pacific. I must have a very good reason to sell that much stock in the face of the strong
market.
"I don't know," I repeated. "I just feel that something is going to happen."
"What's going to happen?"
"I don't know. I can't give you any reason. All I know is that I want to sell that stock.
And I'm going to let 'em have another thousand."
I walked back into the office and gave an order to sell a second thousand. If I was right
in selling the first thousand I ought to have out a little more.
"What could possibly happen?" persisted my friend, who couldn't make up his mind to
follow my lead. If I'd told him that I had heard UP. was going down he'd have sold it
without asking me from whom I'd heard it or why. "What could possibly happen?" he
asked again.
"A million things could happen. But I can't promise you that any of them will. I can't
give you any reasons and I can't tell fortunes," I told him.
"Then you're crazy," he said. "Stark crazy, selling that stock without rime or reason. You
don't know why you want to sell it?"
"I don't know why I want to sell it. I only know I do want to," I said. "I want to, like
everything." The urge was so strong that I sold another thousand.
That was too much for my friend. He grabbed me by the arm and said, "Here! Let's get
out of this place before you sell the entire capital stock."
I had sold as much as I needed to satisfy my feeling, so I followed him without waiting
for a report on the last two thousand shares. It was a pretty good jag of stock for me to
sell even with the best of reasons. It seemed more than enough to be short of without any
reason whatever, particularly when the entire market was so strong and there was
nothing in sight to make anybody think of the bear side. But I remembered that on
previous occasions when I had the same urge to sell and didn't do it I always had reasons
to regret it.
I have told some of these stories to friends, and some of million. And Jim Fisk just
looked at him and said, "Go ahead! Do! Sell it short and invite me to your funeral.' "
"Yes," I said; "and if that chap had sold it short, look at the killing he would have made!
Sell some UP. yourself."
"Not I! I'm the kind that thrives best on not rowing against wind and tide."
On the following day, when fuller reports came in, the market began to slide off, but
even then not as violently as it should. Knowing that nothing under the sun could stave
off a substantial break I doubled up and sold five thousand shares. Oh, by that time it
was plain to most people, and my brokers were willing enough. It wasn't reckless of
them or of me, not the way I sized up the market. On the day following, the market
began to go for fair. There was the dickens to pay. Of course I pushed my luck for all it
was worth. I doubled up again and sold ten thousand shares more. It was the only play
possible.
I wasn't thinking of anything except that I was right 100 per cent right and that this was
a heaven-sent opportunity. It was up to me to take advantage of it. I sold more. Did I
think that with such a big line of shorts out, it wouldn't take much of a rally to wipe out
my paper profits and possibly my principal? I don't know whether I thought of that or
not, but if I did it didn't carry much weight with me. I wasn't plunging recklessly. I was
really playing conservatively. There was nothing that anybody could do to undo the
earthquake, was there? They couldn't restore the crumpled buildings overnight, free,
gratis, for nothing, could they? AH the money in the world couldn't help much in the
next few hours, could it?
I was not betting blindly. I wasn't a crazy bear. I wasn't drunk with success or thinking
that because Frisco was pretty well wiped off the map the entire country was headed for
the scrap heap. No, indeed! I didn't look for a panic. Well, the next day I cleaned up. I
made two hundred and fifty thousand dollars. It was my biggest winnings up to that
time. It was all made in a few days. The Street paid no attention to the earthquake the
first day or two. They'll tell you that it was because the first despatches were not so
alarming, but I think it was because it took so long to change the point of view of the
public toward the securities markets. Even the professional traders for the most part
were slow and shortsighted.
I have no explanation to give you, either scientific or childish. I am telling you what I
did, and why, and what came of it. I was much less concerned with the mystery of the
hunch than with the fact that I got a quarter of a million out of it. It meant that I could
now swing a much bigger line than ever, if or when the time came for it.
That summer I went to Saratoga Springs. It was supposed to be a vacation for me, but I
kept an eye on the market. To begin with, I wasn't so tired that it bothered me to think
about it. And then, everybody I knew up there had or had had an active interest in it. We
naturally talked about it. I have noticed that there is quite a difference between talking
and trading. Some of these chaps remind you of the bold clerk who talks to his
cantankerous employer as to a yellow dog when he tells you about it.
Harding Brothers had a branch office in Saratoga. Many of their customers were there.
But the real reason, I suppose, was the advertising value. Having a branch office in a
resort is simply high-class billboard advertising. I used to drop in and sit around with the
rest of the crowd. The manager was a very nice chap from the New York office who was
there to give the glad hand to friends and strangers and, if possible, to get business. It
was a wonderful place for tips all kinds of tips, horse-race, stock-market, and waiters'.
The office knew I didn't take any, so the manager didn't come and whisper confidentially
in my ear what he'd just got on the q. t. from the New York office. He simply passed
over the telegrams, saying, "This is what they're sending out," or something of the kind.
Of course I watched the market. With me, to look at the quotation board and to read the
signs is one process. My good friend Union Pacific, I noticed, looked like going up. The
price was high, but the stock acted as if it were being accumulated. I watched it a couple
of days without trading in it, and the more I watched it the more convinced I became that
it was being bought on balance by somebody who was no piker, somebody who not only
had a big bank roll but knew what was what. Very clever accumulation, I thought.
As soon as I was sure of this I naturally began to buy it, at about 160. It kept on acting
all hunky, and so I kept on buying it, five hundred shares at a clip. The more I bought
the stronger it got, without any spurt, and I was feeling very comfortable. I couldn't see
any reason why that stock shouldn't go up a great deal more; not with what I read on the
tape.
All of a sudden the manager came to me and said they'd got a message from New York
they had a direct wire of course asking if I was in the office, and when they answered
yes, another came saying: "Keep him there. Tell him Mr. Harding wants to speak to
him."
I said I'd wait, and bought five hundred shares more of UP. I couldn't imagine what
Harding could have to say to me. I didn't think it was anything about business. My
margin was more than ample for what I was buying. Pretty soon the manager came and
told me that Mr. Ed Harding wanted me on the long-distance telephone.
"Hello, Ed," I said.
But he said, "What the devil's the matter with you? Are you crazy?"
"Are you?" I said.
"What are you doing?" he asked.
"What do you mean?"
"Buying all that stock."
"Why, isn't my margin all right?"
"It isn't a case of margin, but of being a plain sucker."
"I don't get you."
"Why are you buying all that Union Pacific?"
"It's going up," I said.
"Going up, hell! Don't you know that the insiders are feeding it out to you? You're just
about the easiest mark up there. You'd have more fun losing it on the ponies. Don't let
them kid you."
"Nobody is kidding me," I told him. "I haven't talked to a soul about it."
But he came back at me: "You can't expect a miracle to save you every time you plunge
in that stock. Get out while you've still got a chance," he said. "It's a crime to be long of
that stock at this level when these highbinders are shoveling it out by the ton."
"The tape says they're buying it," I insisted.
"Larry, I got heart disease when your orders began to come in. For the love of Mike,
don't be a sucker. Get out! Right away. It's liable to bust wide open any minute. I've
done my duty. Good-by!" And he hung up.
Ed Harding was a very clever chap, unusually well-informed and a real friend,
disinterested and kindhearted. And what was even more, I knew he was in position to
hear things. All I had to go by, in my purchases of UP., was my years of studying the
behaviour of stocks and my perception of certain symptoms which experience had
taught me usually accompanied a substantial rise. I don't know what happened to me,
but I suppose I must have concluded that my tape reading told me the stock was being
absorbed simply because very clever manipulation by the insiders made the tape tell a
story that wasn't true. Possibly I was impressed by the pains Ed Harding took to stop me
from making what he was so sure would be a colossal mistake on my part. Neither his
brains nor his motives were to be questioned. Whatever it was that made me decide to
follow his advice, I cannot tell you; but follow it, I did.
I sold out all my Union Pacific. Of course if it was unwise to be long of it it was equally
unwise not to be short of it. So after I got rid of my long stock I sold four thousand
shares short. I put out most of it around 162.
The next day the directors of the Union Pacific Company declared a 10 per cent
dividend on the stock. At first nobody in Wall Street believed it. It was too much like the
desperate maneuver of cornered gamblers. All the newspapers jumped on the directors.
But while the Wall Street talent hesitated to act the market boiled over. Union Pacific
led, and on huge transactions made a new high-record price. Some of the room traders
made fortunes in an hour and I remember later hearing about a rather dull-witted
specialist who made a mistake that put three hundred and fifty thousand dollars in his
pocket. He sold his seat the following week and became a gentleman farmer the
following month.
Of course I realised, the moment I heard the news of the declaration of that
unprecedented 10 per cent dividend, that I got what I deserved for disregarding the voice
of experience and listening to the voice of a tipster. My own convictions I had set aside
for the suspicions of a friend, simply because he was disinterested and as a rule knew
what he was doing.
As soon as I saw Union Pacific making new high records I said to myself, "This is no
stock for me to be short of."
All I had in the world was up as margin in Harding's office. I was neither cheered nor
made stubborn by the knowledge of that fact. What was plain was that I had read the
tape accurately and that I had been a ninny to let Ed Harding shake my own resolution.
There was no sense in recriminations, because I had no time to lose; and besides, what's
done is done. So I gave an order to take in my shorts. The stock was around 165 when I
sent in that order to buy in the four thousand UP. at the market. I had a three-point loss
on it at that figure. Well, my brokers paid 172 and 174 for some of it before they were
through. I found when I got my reports that Ed Harding's kindly intentioned interference
cost me forty thousand dollars. A low price for a man to pay for not having the courage
of his own convictions! It was a cheap lesson.
I wasn't worried, because the tape said still higher prices. It was an unusual move and
there were no precedents for the action of the directors, but I did this time what I thought
I ought to do. As soon as I had given the first order to buy four thousand shares to cover
my shorts I decided to profit by what the tape indicated and so I went along. I bought
four thousand shares and held that stock until the next morning. Then I got out. I not
only made up the forty thousand dollars I had lost but about fifteen thousand besides. If
Ed Harding hadn't tried to save me money I'd have made a killing. But he did me a very
great service, for it was the lesson of that episode that, I firmly believe, completed my
education as a trader.
It was not that all I needed to learn was not to lake tips but follow my own inclination. It
was that I gained confidence in myself and I was able finally to shake off the old method
of trading. That Saratoga experience was my last haphazard, hit-or-miss operation. From
then on I began to think of basic conditions instead of individual stocks. I promoted
myself to a higher grade in the hard school of speculation. It was a long and difficult
step to take.



Chapter VII
I never hesitate to tell a man that I am bullish or bearish. But I do not tell people to
buy or sell any particular stock. In a bear market all stocks go down and in a bull market
they go up. I don't mean of course that in a bear market caused by a war, ammunition
shares do not go up. I speak in a general sense. But the average man doesn't wish to be
told that it is a bull or a bear market. What he desires is to be told specifically which
particular stock to buy or sell. He wants to get something for nothing. He does not wish
to work. He doesn't even wish to have to think. It is too much bother to have to count the
money that he picks up from the ground.
Well, I wasn't that lazy, but I found it easier to think of individual stocks than of the
general market and therefore of individual fluctuations rather than of general
movements. I had to change and I did.
People don't seem to grasp easily the fundamentals of stock trading. I have often said
that to buy on a rising market is the most comfortable way of buying stocks. Now, the
point is not so much to buy as cheap as possible or go short at top prices, but to buy or
sell at the right time. When I am bearish and I sell a stock, each sale must be at a lower
level than the previous sale. When I am buying, the reverse is true. I must buy on a
rising scale. I don't buy long stock on a scale down, I buy on a scale up.
Let us suppose, for example, that I am buying some stock. I'll buy two thousand shares
at no. If the stock goes up to ill after I buy it I am, at least temporarily, right in my
operation, because it is a point higher; it shows me a profit. Well, because I am right I go
in and buy another two thousand shares. If the market is still rising I buy a third lot of
two thousand shares. Say the price goes to 114. I think it is enough for the time being. I
now have a trading basis to work from. I am long six thousand shares at an average of
in%, and the stock is selling at 114. I won't buy any more just then. I wait and see. I
figure that at some stage of the rise there is going to be a reaction. I want to see how the
market takes care of itself after that reaction. It will probably react to where I got my
third lot. Say that after going higher it falls back to H2J4, and then rallies. Well, just as it
goes back to 113% I shoot an order to buy four thousand at the market of course. Well,
if I get that fouf thousand at 113% I know something is wrong and I'll give a testing
order that is, I'll sell one thousand shares to see how the market takes it. But suppose that
of the order to buy the four thousand shares that I put in when the price was 113^4 I get
two thousand at 114 and five hundred at 114^ and the rest on the way up so that for the
last five hundred I pay 115^. Then I know I am right. It is the way I get the four
thousand shares that tells me whether I am right in buying that particular stock at that
particular time for of course I am working on the assumption that I have checked up
general conditions pretty well and they are bullish. I never want to buy stocks too cheap
or too easily.
I remember a story I heard about Deacon S. V. White when he was one of the big
operators of the Street. He was a very fine old man, clever as they make them, and
brave. He did some wonderful things in his day, from all I've heard.
It was in the old days when Sugar was one of the most continuous purveyors of
fireworks in the market.
H. O. Havemeyer, president of the company, was in the heyday of his power. I gather
from talks with the old-timers that H. O. and his following had all the resources of cash
and cleverness necessary to put through successfully any deal in their- own stock. They
tell me that Havemeyer trimmed more small professional traders in that stock than any
other insider in. any other stock. As a rule, the floor traders are more likely to thwart the
insiders' game than help it.
One day a man who knew Deacon White rushed into the office all excited and said,
"Deacon, you told me if I ever got any good information to come to you at once with it
and if you used it you'd carry me for a few hundred shares." He paused for breath and
for confirmation.
The deacon looked at him in that meditative way he had and said, "I don't know whether
I ever told you exactly that or not, but I am willing to pay for information that I can use."
"Well, I've got it for you."
"Now, that's nice," said the deacon, so mildly that the man with the info swelled up and
said,
"Yes, sir, deacon." Then he came closer so nobody else would hear and said, "H. O.
Havemeyer is buying Sugar."
"Is he?" asked the deacon quite calmly.
It peeved the informant, who said impressively: "Yes, sir. Buying all he can get,
deacon."
"My friend, are you sure?" asked old S. V.
"Deacon, I know it for a positive fact. The old inside gang are buying all they can lay
their hands on. It's got something to do with the tariff and there's going to be a killing in
the common. It will cross the preferred. And that means a sure thirty points for a starter."
"Do you really think so?" And the old man looked at him over the top of the oldfashioned
silver-rimmed spectacles that he had put on to look at the tape.
"Do I think so? No, I don't think so; I know so. Absolutely! Why, deacon, when H. O.
Havemeyer and his friends buy Sugar as they're doing now they're never satisfied with
anything less than forty points net. I shouldn't be surprised to see the market get away
from them any minute and shoot up before they've got their full lines. There ain't as
much of it kicking around the brokers' offices as there was a month ago."
"He's buying Sugar, eh?" repeated the deacon absently.
"Buying it? Why, he's scooping it in as fast as he can without putting up the price on
himself."
"So?" said the deacon. That was all. But it was enough to nettle the tipster, and he said,
"Yes, sir-ree! And I call that very good information. Why, it's absolutely straight."
"Is it?"
"Yes; and it ought to be worth a whole lot. Are you going to use it?"
"Oh, yes. I'm going to use it."
"When?" asked the information bringer suspiciously.
"Right away." And the deacon called: -"Frank!" It was the first name of his shrewdest
broker, who was then in the adjoining room.
"Yes, sir," said Frank.
"I wish you'd go over to the Board and sell ten thousand Sugar."
"Sell?" yelled the tipster. There was such suffering in his voice that Frank, who had
started out at a run,
halted in his tracks.
"Why, yes," said the deacon mildly.
"But I told you H. O. Havemeyer was buying it!"
"I know you did, my friend," said the deacon calmly; and turning to the broker: "Make
haste, Frank!"
The broker rushed out to execute the order and the tipster turned red.
"I came in here," he said furiously, "with the best information I ever had. I brought it to
you because I
thought you were my friend, and square. I expected you to act on it."
"I am acting on it," interrupted the deacon in a tranquillising voice.
"But I told you H. O. and his gang were buying!"
"That's right. I heard you."
"Buying! Buying! I said buying!" shrieked the tipster.
"Yes, buying! That is what I understood you to say," the deacon assured him. He was
standing by the ticker, looking at the tape.
"But you are selling it."
"Yes; ten thousand shares." And the deacon nodded. "Selling it, of course."
He stopped talking to concentrate on the tape and the tipster approached to see what the
deacon saw, for the old man was very foxy. While he was looking over the deacon's
shoulder a clerk came in with a slip, obviously the report from Frank. The deacon barely
glanced at it. He had seen on the tape "how his order had been executed.
It made him say to the clerk, "Tell him to sell another ten thousand Sugar."
"Deacon, I swear to you that they really are buying the stock!"
"Did Mr. Havemeyer tell you?" asked the deacon quietly.
"Of course not! He never tells anybody anything. He would not bat an eyelid to help his
best friend make a nickel. But I know this is true."
"Do not allow yourself to become excited, my friend." And the deacon held up a hand.
He was looking at the tape. The tip-bringer said, bitterly:
"If I had known you were going to do the opposite of what I expected I'd never have
wasted your time or mine. But I am not going to feel glad when you cover that stock at
an awful loss. I'm sorry for you, deacon. Honest! If you'll excuse me I'll go elsewhere
and act on my own information."
"I'm acting on it. I think I know a little about the market; not as much, perhaps, as you
and your friend H. O. Havemeyer, but still a little. What I am doing is what my
experience tells me is the wise thing to do with the information you brought me. After a
man has been in Wall Street as long as I have he is grateful for anybody who feels sorry
for him. Remain calm, my friend."
The man just stared at the deacon, for whose judgment and nerve he had great respect.
Pretty soon the clerk came in again and handed a report to the deacon, who looked at it
and said: "Now tell him to buy thirty thousand Sugar. Thirty thousand!"
The clerk hurried away and the tipster just grunted and looked at the old gray fox.
"My friend," the deacon explained kindly, "I did not doubt that you were telling me the
truth as you saw it. But even if I had heard H. O. Havemeyer tell you himself, I still
would have acted as I did. For there was only one way to find out if anybody was buying
the stock in the way you said H. O. Havemeyer and his friends were buying it, and that
was to do what I did. The first ten thousand shares went fairly easily. It was not quite
conclusive. But the second ten thousand was absorbed by a market that did not stop
rising. The way the twenty thousand shares were taken by somebody proved to me that
somebody was in truth willing to take all the stock that was offered. It doesn't
particularly matter at this point who that particular somebody may be. So I have covered
my shorts and am long ten thousand shares, and I think that your information was good
as far as it went."
"And how far does it go?" asked the tipster.
"You have five hundred shares in this office at the average price of the ten thousand
shares," said the deacon. "Good day, my friend. Be calm the next time."
"Say, deacon," said the tipster, "won't you please sell mine when you sell yours? I don't
know as much as I thought I did."
That's the theory. That is why I never buy stocks cheap. Of course I always try to buy
effectively in such a way as to help my side of the market. When it comes to selling
stocks, it is plain that nobody can sell unless somebody wants those stocks.
If you operate on a large scale you will have to bear that in mind all the time. A man
studies conditions, plans his operations carefully and proceeds to act. He swings a pretty
fair line and he accumulates a big profit on paper. Well, that man can't sell at will. You
can't expect the market to absorb fifty thousand shares of one stock as easily as it does
one hundred. He will have to wait until he has a market there to take it. There comes the
time when he thinks the requisite buying power is there. When that opportunity comes
he must seize it. As a rule he will have been waiting for it. He has to sell when he can,
not when he wants to. To learn the time, he has to watch and test. It is no trick to tell
when the market can take what you give it. But in starting a movement it is unwise to
take on your full line unless you are convinced that conditions are exactly right.
Remember that stocks are never too high for you to begin buying or too low to begin
selling. But after the initial transaction, don't make a second unless the first shows you a
profit. Wait and watch. That is where your tape reading conies in to enable you to decide
as to the proper time for beginning. Much depends upon beginning at exactly the right
time. It took me years to realize the importance of this. It also cost me some hundreds of
thousands of dollars.
I don't mean to be understood as advising persistent pyramiding. A man can pyramid
and make big money that he couldn't make if he didn't pyramid; of course. But what I
meant to say was this: Suppose a man's line is five hundred shares of stock. I say that he
ought not to buy it all at once ; not if he is speculating. If he is merely gambling the only
advice I have to give him is, don't!
Suppose he buys his first hundred, and that promptly shows" him a loss. Why should he
go to work and get more stock? He ought to see at once that he is in wrong; at least
temporarily.


Chapter VIII
The Union Pacific incident in Saratoga in the summer of 1906 made me more
independent than ever of tips and talk that is, of the opinions and surmises and
suspicions of other people, however friendly or however able they might be personally.
Events, not vanity, proved for me that I could read the tape more accurately than most of
the people about me. I also was better equipped than the average customer of Harding
Brothers in that I was utterly free from speculative prejudices. The bear side doesn't
appeal to me any more than the bull side, or vice versa. My one steadfast prejudice is
against being wrong.
Even as a lad I always got my own meanings out of such facts as I observed. It is the
only way in which the meaning reaches me. I cannot get out of facts what somebody
tells me to get. They are my facts, don't you see? If I believe some thing you can be sure
it is because I simply must. When I am long of stocks it is because my reading of
conditions has made me bullish. But you find many people, reputed to be intelligent,
who are bullish because they have stocks. I do not allow my possessions or my
prepossessions either to do any thinking for me. That is why I repeat that I never argue
with the tape. To be angry at the market because it unexpectedly or even illogically goes
against you is like getting mad at your lungs because you have pneumonia.
I had been gradually approaching the full realization of how much more than tape
reading there was to stock speculation. Old man Partridge's insistence on the vital
importance of being continuously bullish in a bull market doubtless made tny mind
dwell on the need above all other things of determining the kind of market a man is
trading in. I began to realize that the big money must necessarily be in the big swing.
Whatever might seem to give a big swing its initial impulse, the fact is that its
continuance is not the result of manipulation by pools or artifice by financiers, but
depends upon basic conditions. And no matter who opposes it, the swing must inevitably
run as far and as fast and as long as the impelling forces determine.
After Saratoga I began to see more clearly perhaps I should say more maturely that since
the entire list moves in accordance with the main current there was not so much need as
I had imagined to study individual plays or the behaviour of this or the other stock. Also,
by thinking of the swing a man was not limited in his trading. He could buy or sell the
entire list. In certain stocks a short line is dangerous after a man sells more than a certain
percentage of the capital stock, the amount depending upon how, where and by whom
the stock is held. But he could sell a million shares of the general list if he had the price
without the danger of being squeezed. A great deal of money used to be made
periodically by insiders in the old days out of the shorts and their carefully fostered fears
of corners and squeezes.
Obviously the thing to do was to be bullish in a bull market and bearish in a bear market.
Sounds silly, doesn't it? But I had to grasp that general principle firmly before I saw that
to put it into practice really meant to anticipate probabilities. It took me a long time to
learn to trade on those lines. But in justice to myself I must remind you that up to then I
had never had a big enough stake to speculate that way. A big swing will mean big
money if your line is big, and to be able to swing a big line you need a big balance at
your broker's.
I always had or felt that I had to make my daily bread out of the stock market. It
interfered with my efforts to increase the stake available for the more profitable but
slower and therefore more immediately expensive method of trading on swings.
But now not only did my confidence in myself grow stronger but my brokers ceased to
think of me as a sporadically lucky Boy Plunger. They had made a great deal out of me
in commissions, but now I was in a fair way to become their star customer and as such
to have a value beyond the actual volume of my trading. A customer who makes money
is an asset to any broker's office.
The moment I ceased to be satisfied with merely studying the tape I ceased to concern
myself exclusively with the daily fluctuations in specific stocks, and when that happened
I simply had to study the game from a different angle. I worked back from the quotation
to first principles; from price fluctuations to basic conditions.
Of course I had been reading the daily dope regularly for a long time. All traders do. But
much of it was gossip, some of it deliberately false, and the rest merely the personal
opinion of the writers. The reputable weekly reviews when they touched upon
underlying conditions were not entirely satisfactory to me. The point of view of the
financial editors was not mine as a rule. It was not a vital matter for them to marshal
their facts and draw their conclusions from them, but it was for me. Also there was a
vast difference in our appraisal of the element of time. The analysis of the week that had
passed was less important to me than the forecast of the weeks that were to come.
For years I had been the victim of an unfortunate combination of inexperience, youth
and insufficient capital. But now I felt the elation of a discoverer. My new attitude
toward the game explained my repeated failures to make big money in New York. But
now with adequate resources, experience and confidence, I was in such a hurry to try the
new key that I did not notice that there was another lock on the door a time lock! It was
a perfectly natural oversight. I had to pay the usual tuition a good whack per each step
forward.
I studied the situation in 1906 and I thought that the money outlook was particularly
serious. Much actual wealth the world over had been destroyed. Everybody must sooner
or later feel the pinch, and therefore nobody would be in position to help anybody. It
would not be the kind of hard times that comes from the swapping of a house worth ten
thousand dollars for a carload of race horses worth eight thousand dollars. It was the
complete destruction of the house by fire and of most of the horses by a railroad wreck.
It was good hard cash that went up in cannon smoke in the Boer War, and the millions
spent for feeding nonproducing soldiers in South Africa meant no help from British
investors as in the past. Also, the earthquake and the fire in San Francisco and other
disasters touched everybody manufacturers, farmers, merchants, labourers and
millionaires. The railroads must suffer greatly. I figured that nothing could stave off one
peach of a smash. Such being the case there was but one thing to do sell stocks!
I told you I had already observed that my initial transaction, after I made up my mind
which way I was going to trade, was apt to show me a profit. And now when I decided
to sell I plunged. Since we undoubtedly were entering upon a genuine bear market I was
sure I should make the biggest killing of my career.
The market went off. Then it came back. It shaded off and then it began to advance
steadily. My paper profits vanished and my paper losses grew. One day it looked as if
not a bear would be left to tell the tale of the strictly genuine bear market. I couldn't
stand the gaff. I covered. It was just as well. If I hadn't I wouldn't have had enough left
to buy a postal card. I lost most of my fur, but it was better to live to fight another day.
I had made a mistake. But where? I was bearish in a bear market. That was wise. I had
sold stocks short. That was proper. I had sold them too soon. That was costly. My
position was right but my play was wrong. However, every day brought the market
nearer to the inevitable smash. So I waited and when the rally began to falter and pause I
let them have as much stock as my sadly diminished margins permitted. I was right this
time for exactly one whole day, for on the next there was another rally. Another big bite
out of yours truly! So I read the tape and covered and waited. In due course I sold again
and again they went down promisingly and then they rudely rallied.
It looked as if the market were doing its best to make me go back to my old and simple
ways of bucket-shop trading. It was the first time I had worked with a definite forwardlooking
plan embracing the entire market instead of one or two stocks. I figured that I
must win if I held out. Of course at that time I had not developed my system of placing
my bets or I would have put out my short line on a declining market, as I explained to
you the last time. I would not then have lost so much of my margin. I would have been
wrong but not hurt. You see, I had observed certain facts but had not learned to coordinate
them. My incomplete observation not only did not help but actually hindered.
I have always found it profitable to study my mistakes. Thus I eventually discovered that
it was all very well not to lose your bear position in a bear market, but that at all times
the tape should be read to determine the propitiousness of the time for operating. If you
begin right you will not see your profitable position seriously menaced; and then you
will find no trouble in sitting tight.
Of course to-day I have greater confidence in the accuracy of my observations in which
neither hopes nor hobbies play any part and also I have greater facilities for verifying
my facts as well as for variously testing the correctness of my views. But in 1906 the
succession of rallies dangerously impaired my margins.
I was nearly twenty-seven years old. I had been at the game twelve years. But the first
time I traded because of a crisis that was still to come I found that I had been using a
telescope. Between my first glimpse of the storm cloud and the time for cashing in on
the big break the stretch was evidently so much greater than I had thought that I began to
wonder whether I really saw what I thought I saw so clearly. We had had many
warnings and sensational ascensions in call-money rates. Still some of the great
financiers talked hopefully at least to newspaper reporters and the ensuing rallies in the
stock market gave the lie to the calamity howlers. Was I fundamentally wrong in being
bearish or merely temporarily wrong in having begun to sell short too soon?
I decided that I began too soon, but that I really couldn't help it. Then the market began
to sell off. That was my opportunity. I sold all I could, and then stocks rallied again, to
quite a high level.
It cleaned me out.
There I was right and busted!
I tell you it was remarkable. What happened was this: I looked ahead and saw a big pile
of dollars. Out of it stuck a sign. It had "Help yourself," on it, in huge letters. Beside it
stood a cart with "Lawrence Livingston Trucking Corporation" painted on its side. I had
a brand-new shovel in my hand. There was not another soul in sight, so I had no
competition in the gold-shoveling, which is one beauty of seeing the dollar-heap ahead
of others. The people who might have seen it if they had stopped to look were just then
looking at baseball games instead, or motoring or buying houses to be paid for with the
very dollars that I saw. That was the first time that I had seen big money ahead, and I
naturally started toward it on the run. Before I could reach the dollar-pile my wind went
back on me and I fell to the ground. The pile of dollars was still there, but I had lost the
shovel, and the wagon was gone. So much for sprinting too soon! I was too eager to
prove to myself that I had seen real dollars and not a mirage. I saw, and knew that I saw.
Thinking about the reward for my excellent sight kept me from considering the distance
to the dollar-heap. I should have walked and not sprinted.
That is what happened. I didn't wait to determine whether or not the time was right for
plunging on the bear side. On the one occasion when I should have invoked the aid of
my tape-reading I didn't do it. That is how I came to learn that even when one is
properly bearish at the very beginning of a bear market it is well not to begin selling in
bulk until there is no danger of the engine back-firing.
I had traded in a good many thousands of shares at Harding's office in all those years,
and, moreover, the firm had confidence in me and our relations were of the pleasantest. I
think they felt that I was bound to be right again very shortly and they knew that with
my habit of pushing my luck all I needed was a start and I'd more than recover what I
had lost. They had made a great deal of money out of my trading and they would make
more. So there was no trouble about my being able to trade there again as long as my
credit stood high.
The succession of spankings I had received made me less aggressively cocksure;
perhaps I should say less careless, for of course I knew I was just so much nearer to the
smash. All I could do was wait watchfully, as I should have done before plunging. It
wasn't a case of locking the stable after the horse was stolen. I simply had to be sure, the
next time I tried. If a man didn't make mistakes he'd own the world in a month. But if he
didn't profit by his mistakes he wouldn't own a blessed thing.
Well, sir, one fine morning I came downtown feeling cocksure once more. There wasn't
any doubt this time. I had read an advertisement in the financial pages of all the
newspapers that was the high sign I hadn't had the sense to wait for before plunging. It
was the announcement of a new issue of stock by the Northern Pacific and Great
Northern roads. The payments were to be made on the installment plan for the
convenience of the stockholders. This consideration was something new in Wall Street.
It struck me as more than ominous.
For years the unfailing bull item on Great Northern preferred had been the
announcement that another melon was to be cut, said melon consisting of the right of the
lucky stockholders to subscribe at par to a new issue of Great Northern stock. These
rights were valuable, since the market price was always way above par. But now the
money market was such that the most powerful banking houses in the country were none
too sure the stockholders would be able to pay cash for the bargain. And Great Northern
preferred was selling at about 330!
As soon as I got to the office I told Ed Harding, "The time to sell is right now. This is
when I should have begun. Just look at that ad, will you?"
He had seen it. I pointed out what the bankers' confession amounted to in my opinion,
but he couldn't quite see the big break right on top of us. He thought it better to wait
before putting out a very big short line by reason of the market's habit of having big
rallies. If I waited prices might be lower, but the operation would be safer.
"Ed," I said to him, "the longer the delay in starting the sharper the break will be when it
does start. That ad is a signed confession on the part of the bankers. What they fear is
what I hope. This is a sign for us to get aboard the bear wagon. It is all we needed. If I
had ten million dollars I'd stake every cent of it this minute."
I had to do some more talking and arguing. He wasn't content with the only inferences a
sane man could draw from that amazing advertisement. It was enough for me, but not
for most of the people in the office. I sold a little; too little.
A few days later St. Paul very kindly came out with an announcement of an issue of its
own; either stock or notes, I forget which. But that doesn't matter. What mattered then
was that I noticed the moment I read it that the date of payment was set ahead of the
Great Northern and Northern Pacific payments, which had been announced earlier. It
was as plain as though they had used a megaphone that grand old St. Paul was trying to
beat the two other railroads to what little money there was floating around in Wall
Street. The St. Paul's bankers quite obviously feared that there wasn't enough for all
three and they were not saying, "After you, my dear Alphonse!" If money already was
that scarce and you bet the bankers knew what would it be later? The railroads needed it
desperately. It wasn't there. What was the answer?
Sell 'em! Of course! The public, with their eyes fixed on the stock market, saw little that
week. The wise stock operators saw much that year. That was the difference.
For me, that was the end of doubt and hesitation. I made up my mind for keeps then and
there. That same morning I began what really was my first campaign along the lines that
I have since followed. I told Harding what I thought and how I stood, and he made no
objections to my selling Great Northern preferred at around 330, and other stocks at high
prices. I profited by my earlier and costly mistakes and sold more intelligently.
My reputation and my credit were reestablished In a jiffy. That is the beauty of being
right in a broker's office, whether by accident or not. But this time I was cold-bloodedly
right, not because of a hunch or from skilful reading of the tape, but as the result of my
analysis of conditions affecting the stock market in general. I wasn't guessing. I was
anticipating the inevitable. It did not call for any courage to sell stocks. I simply could
not see anything but lower prices, and I had to act on it, didn't I? What else could I do?
The whole list was soft as mush. Presently there was a rally and people came to me to
warn me that the end of the decline had been reached. The big fellows, knowing the
short interest to be enormous, had decided to squeeze the stuffing out of the bears, and
so forth. It would set us pessimists back a few millions. It was a cinch that the big
fellows would have no mercy. I used to thank these kindly counsellors. I wouldn't even
argue, because then they would have thought that I wasn't grateful for the warnings.
The friend who had been in Atlantic City with me was in agony. He could understand
the hunch that was followed by the earthquake. He couldn't disbelieve in such agencies,
since I had made a quarter of a million by intelligently obeying my blind impulse to sell
Union Pacific. He even said it was Providence working in its mysterious way to make
me sell stocks when he himself was bullish. And he could understand my second UP.
trade in Saratoga because he could understand any deal that involved one stock, on
which the tip definitely fixed the movement in advance, either up or down. But this
thing of predicting that all stocks were bound to go down used to exasperate him. What
good did that kind of dope do anybody? How in blazes could a gentleman tell what to
do?
I recalled old Partridge's favourite remark "Well, this is a bull market, you know" as
though that were tip enough for anybody who was wise enough; as in truth it was. It was
very curious how, after suffering tremendous losses from a break of fifteen or twenty
points, people who were still hanging on, welcomed a three-point rally and were certain
the bottom had been reached and complete recovery begun.
One day my friend came to me and asked me, "Have you covered?"
"Why should I?" I said
"For the best reason in the world."
"What reason is that?"
"To make money. They've touched bottom and what goes down must come up. Isn't that
so?"
"Yes," I answered. "First they sink to the bottom. Then they come up; but not right
away. They've got to be good and dead a couple of days. It isn't time for these corpses to
rise to the surface. They are not quite dead yet."
An old-timer heard me. He was one of those chaps that are always reminded of
something. He said that William R. Travers, who was bearish, once met a friend who
was bullish. They exchanged market views and the friend said, "Mr. Travers, how can
you be bearish with the market so stiff?" and Travers retorted, "Yes! Th-the s-s-stiffness
of d-death!" It was Travers who went to the office of a company and asked to be allowed
to see the books. The clerk asked him, "Have you an interest in this company?" and
Travers answered, "I sh-should s-say I had! I'm sh-short t-t-twenty thousand sh-shares of
the stock!"
Well, the rallies grew feebler and feebler. I was pushing my luck for all I was worth.
Every time I sold a few thousand shares of Great Northern preferred the price broke
several points. I felt out weak spots elsewhere and let 'em have a few. All yielded, with
one impressive exception; and that was Reading.
When everything else hit the toboggan slide Reading stood like the Rock of Gibraltar.
Everybody said the stock was cornered. It certainly acted like it. They used to tell me it
was plain suicide to sell Reading short. There were people in the office who were now
as bearish on everything as I was. But when anybody hinted at selling Reading they
shrieked for help. I myself had sold some short and was standing pat on it. At the same
time I naturally preferred to seek and hit the soft spots instead of attacking the more
strongly protected specialties. My tape reading found easier money for me in other
stocks.
I heard a great deal about the Reading bull pool. It was a mighty strong pool. To begin
with they had a lot of low-priced stock, so that their average was actually below the
prevailing level, according to friends who told me. Moreover, the principal members of
the pool had close connections of the friendliest character with the banks whose money
they were using to carry their huge holdings of Reading. As long as the price stayed up
the bankers' friendship was staunch and steadfast. One pool member's paper profit was
upward of three millions. That allowed for some decline without causing fatalities. No
wonder the stock stood up and defied the bears. Every now and then the room traders
looked at the price, smacked their lips and proceeded to test it with a thousand shares or
two. They could not dislodge a share, so they covered and went looking elsewhere for
easier money. Whenever I looked at it I also sold a little more just enough to convince
myself that I was true to my new trading principles and wasn't playing favourites.
In the old days the strength of Reading might have fooled me. The tape kept on saying,
"Leave it alone!" But my reason told me differently. I was anticipating a general break,
and there were not going to be any exceptions, pool or no pool.
I have always played a lone hand. I began that way in the bucket shops and have kept it
up. It is the way my mind works. I have to do my own seeing and my own thinking. But
I can tell you after the market began to go my way I felt for the first time in my life that I
had allies the strongest and truest in the world: underlying conditions. They were
helping me with all their might. Perhaps they were a trifle slow at times in bringing up
the reserves, but they were dependable, provided I did not get too impatient. I was not
pitting my tape-reading knack or my hunches against chance. The inexorable logic of
events was making money for me.
The thing was to be right; to know it and to act accordingly. General conditions, my true
allies, said "Down!" and Reading disregarded the command. It was an insult to us. It
began to annoy me to see Reading holding firmly, as though everything were serene. It
ought to be the best short sale in the entire list because it had not gone down and the
pool was carrying a lot of stock that it would not be able to carry when the money
stringency grew more pronounced. Some day the bankers' friends would fare no better
than the friendless public. The stock must go with the others. If Reading didn't decline,
then my theory was wrong; I was wrong; facts were wrong; logic was wrong.
I figured that the price held because the Street was afraid to sell it. So on day I gave to
two brokers each an order to sell four thousand shares, at the same time. You ought to
have seen that cornered stock, that it was sure suicide to go short of, take a headlong
dive when those competitive orders struck it. I let 'em have a few thousand more. The
price was in when I started selling it. Within a few minutes I took in my entire short line
at 92.
I had a wonderful time after that, and in February of 1907 I cleaned up. Great Northern
preferred had gone down sixty or seventy points, and other stocks in proportion. I had
made a good bit, but the reason I cleaned up was that I figured that the decline had
discounted the immediate future. I looked for a fair recovery, but I wasn't bullish enough
to play for a turn. I wasn't going to lose my position entirely. The market would not be
right for me to trade in for a while. The first ten thousand dollars I made in the bucket
shops I lost because I traded in and out of season, every day, whether or not conditions
were right. I wasn't making that mistake twice. Also, don't forget that I had gone broke a
little while before because I had seen this break too soon and started selling before it was
time. Now when I had a big profit I wanted to cash in so that I could feel I had been
right. The rallies had broken me before. I wasn't going to let the next rally wipe me out.
Instead of sitting tight I went to Florida. I love fishing and I needed a rest. I could get
both down there. And besides, there are direct wires between Wall Street and Palm
Beach.



Chapter IX
I cruised off the coast of Florida. The fishing was good. I was out of stocks. My mind
was easy. I was having a fine time. One day off Palm Beach some friends came
alongside in a motor boat. One of them brought a newspaper with him. I hadn't looked at
one in some days and had not felt any desire to see one. I was not interested in any news
it might print. But I glanced over the one my friend brought to the yacht, and I saw that
the market had had a big rally; ten points and more.
I told my friends that I would go ashore with them. Moderate rallies from time to time
were reasonable. But the bear market was not over; and here was Wall Street or the fool
public or desperate bull interests disregarding monetary conditions and marking up
prices beyond reason or letting somebody else do it. It was too much for me. I simply
had to take a look at the market. I didn't know what I might or might not do. But I knew
that my pressing need was the sight of the quotation board.
My brokers, Harding Brothers, had a branch office in Palm Beach. When I walked in I
found there a lot of chaps I knew. Most of them were talking bullish. They were of the
type that trade on the tape and want quick action. Such traders don't care to look ahead
very far because they don't need to with their style of play. I told you how I'd got to be
known in the New York office as the Boy Plunger. Of course people always magnify a
fellow's winnings and the size of the line he swings. The fellows in the office had heard
that I had made a killing in New York on the bear side and they now expected that I
again would plunge on the short side. They themselves thought the rally would go to a
good deal further, but they rather considered it my duty to fight it.
I had come down to Florida on a fishing trip. I had been under a pretty severe strain and
I needed my holiday. But the moment I saw how far the recovery in prices had gone I no
longer felt the need of a vacation. I had not thought of just what I was going to do when
I came ashore. But now I knew I must sell stocks. I was right, and I must prove it in my
old and only way by saying it with money. To sell the general list would be a proper,
prudent, profitable and even patriotic action.
The first thing I saw on the quotation board was that Anaconda was on the point of
crossing 300. It had been going up by leaps and bounds and there was apparently an
aggressive bull party in it. It was an old trading theory of mine that when a stock crosses
100 or 200 or 300 for the first time the price does not stop at the even figure but goes a
good deal higher, so that if you buy it as soon as it crosses the line it is almost certain to
show you a profit. Timid people don't like to buy a stock at a new high record. But I had
the history of such movements to guide me.
Anaconda was only quarter stock that is, the par of the shares was only twenty-five
dollars. It took four hundred shares of it to equal the usual one hundred shares of other
stocks, the par value of which was one hundred dollars. I figured that when it crossed
300 it ought to keep on going and probably touch 340 in a jiffy.
I was bearish, remember, but I was also a tape-reading trader. I knew Anaconda, if it
went the way I figured, would move very quickly. Whatever moves fast always appeals
to me. I have learned patience and how to sit tight, but my personal preference is for
fleet movements, and Anaconda certainly was no sluggard. My buying it because it
crossed 300 was prompted by the desire, always strong in me, of confirming my
observations.
Just then the tape was saying that the buying was stronger than the selling, and therefore
the general rally might easily go a bit further. It would be prudent to wait before going
short. Still I might as well pay myself wages for waiting. This would be accomplished
by taking a quick thirty points out of Anaconda. Bearish on the entire market and bullish
on that one stock! So I bought thirty-two thousand shares of Anaconda that is, eight
thousand full shares. It was a nice little flyer but I was sure of my premises and I figured
that the profit would help to swell the margin available for bear operations later on.
On the next day the telegraph wires were down on account of a storm up North or
something of the sort. I was in Harding's office waiting for news. The crowd was
chewing the rag and wondering all sorts of things, as stock traders will when they can't
trade. Then we got a quotation the only one that day: Anaconda, 292.
There was a chap with me, a broker I had met in New York. He knew I was long eight
thousand full shares and I suspect that he had some of his own, for when we got that one
quotation he certainly had a fit. He couldn't tell whether the stock at that very moment
had gone off another ten points or not. The way Anaconda had gone up it wouldn't have
been anything unusual for it to break twenty points. But I said to him, "Don't you worry,
John. It will be all right to-morrow." That was really the way I felt. But he looked at me
and shook his head. He knew better. He was that kind. So I laughed, and I waited in the
office in case some quotation trickled through. But no, sir. That one was all we got:
Anaconda, 292. It meant a paper loss to me of nearly one hundred thousand dollars. I
had wanted quick action. Well, I was getting it.
The next day the wires were working and we got the quotations as usual. Anaconda
opened at 298 and went up to 302^4, but pretty soon it began to fade away. Also, the rest
of the market was not acting just right for a further rally. I made up my mind that if
Anaconda went back to 301 I must" consider the whole thing a fake movement. On a
legitimate advance the price should have gone to 310 without stopping. If instead it
reacted it meant that precedents had failed me and I was wrong: and the only thing to do
when a man is wrong is to be right by ceasing to be wrong. I had bought eight thousand
full shares in expectation of a thirty or forty point rise. It would not be my first mistake;
nor my last.
Sure enough, Anaconda fell back to 301. The moment it touched that figure I sneaked
over to the telegraph operator they had a direct wire to the New York office and I said to
him, "Sell all my Anaconda, eight thousand full shares." I said it in a low voice. I didn't
want anybody else to know what I was doing.
He looked up at me almost in horror. But I nodded and said, "All I've got!"
"Surely, Mr. Livingston, you don't meant at the market?" and he looked as if he was
going to lose a couple of millions of his own through bum execution by a careless
broker. But I just told him, "Sell it! Don't argue about it!"
The two Black boys, Jim and Ollie, were in the office, out of hearing of the operator and
myself. They were big traders who had come originally from Chicago, where they had
been famous plungers in wheat, and were now heavy traders on the New York Stock
Exchange. They were very wealthy and were high rollers for fair.
As I left the telegraph operator to go back to my seat in front of the quotation board
Oliver Black nodded to me and smiled.
"You'll be sorry, Larry," he said.
I stopped and asked him, "What do you mean?"
"To-morrow you'll be buying it back."
"Buying what back?" I said. I hadn't told a soul except the telegraph operator.
"Anaconda," he said. "You'll be paying 320 for it. That wasn't a good move of yours,
Larry." And he smiled again.
"What wasn't?" And I looked innocent.
"Selling your eight thousand Anaconda at the market; in fact, insisting on it," said Ollie
Black.
I knew that he was supposed to be very clever and always traded on inside news. But
how he knew my business so accurately was beyond me. I was sure the office hadn't
given me away.
"Ollie, how did you know that?" I asked him.
He laughed and told me: "I got it from Charlie Kratzer." That was the telegraph operator.
"But he never budged from his place," I said.
"I couldn't hear you and him whispering," he chuckled. "But I heard every word of the
message he sent to the New York office for you. I learned telegraphy years ago after I
had a big row over a mistake in a message. Since then when I do what you did just now
give an order by word of mouth to an operator I want to be sure the operator sends the
message as I give it to him. I know what he sends in my name. But you will be sorry you
sold that Anaconda. It's going to 500."
"Not this trip, Ollie," I said.
He stared at me and said, "You're pretty cocky about it."
"Not I; the tape," I said. There wasn't any ticker there so there wasn't any tape. But he
knew what I meant.
"I've heard of those birds," he said, "who look at the tape and instead of seeing prices
they see a railroad time-table of the arrival and departure of stocks. But they were in
padded cells where they couldn't hurt themselves."
I didn't answer him anything because about that time the boy brought me a
memorandum. They had sold five thousand shares at 299-3/4. I knew our quotations
were a little behind the market. The price on the board at Palm Beach when I gave the
operator the order to sell was 301. I felt so certain that at that very moment the price at
which the stock was actually selling on the Stock Exchange in New York was less, that
if anybody had offered to take the stock off my hands at 296 I'd have been tickled to
death to accept. What happened shows you that I am right in never trading at limits.
Suppose I had limited my selling price to 300? I'd never have got it off. No, sir! When
you want to get out, get out.
Now, my stock cost me about 300. They got off five hundred shares full shares, of
course at 299-3/4. The next thousand they sold at 299-5/8. Then a hundred at 1/2; two
hundred at 3/8 and two hundred at 1/4. The last of my stock went at 298-3/4. It took
Harding's cleverest floor man fifteen minutes to get rid of that last one hundred shares.
They didn't want to crack it wide open.
The moment I got the report of the sale of the last of my long stock I started to do what I
had really come ashore to do that is, to sell stocks. I simply had to. There was the market
after its outrageous rally, begging to be sold. Why, people were beginning to talk bullish
again. The course of the market, however, told me that the rally had run its course. It
was safe to sell them. It did not require reflection.
The next day Anaconda opened below 296. Oliver Black, who was waiting for a further
rally, had come down early to be Johnny-on-the-spot when the stock crossed 320. I don't
know how much of it he was long of or whether he was long of it at all. But he didn't
laugh when he saw the opening prices, nor later in the day when the stock broke still
more and the report came back to us in Palm Beach that there was no market for it at all.
Of course that was all the confirmation any man needed. My growing paper profit kept
reminding me that I was right, hour by hour. Naturally I sold some more stocks.
Everything! It was a bear market. They were all going down. The next day was Friday,
Washington's Birthday. I couldn't stay in Florida and fish because I had put out a very
fair short line, for me. I was needed in New York. Who needed me? I did! Palm Beach
was too far, too remote. Too much valuable time was lost telegraphing back and forth.
I left Palm Beach for New York. On Monday I had to lie in St. Augustine three hours,
waiting for a train. There was a broker's office there, and naturally I had to see how the
market was acting while I was waiting. Anaconda had broken several points since the
last trading day. As a matter of fact, it didn't stop going down until the big break that
fall.
I got to New York and traded on the bear side for about four months. The market had
frequent rallies as before, and I kept covering and putting them out again. I didn't,
strictly speaking, sit tight. Remember, I had lost every cent of the three hundred
thousand dollars I made out of the San Francisco earthquake break. I had been right, and
nevertheless had gone broke. I was now playing safe because after being down a man
enjoys being up, even if he doesn't quite make the top. The way to make money is to
make it. The way to make big money is to be right at exactly the right time. In this
business a man has to think of both theory and practice. A speculator must not be merely
a student, he must be both a student and a speculator.
I did pretty well, even if I can now see where my campaign was tactically inadequate.
When summer came the market got dull. It was a cinch that there would be nothing
doing in a big way until well along in the fall. Everybody I knew had gone or was going
to Europe. I though that would be a good move for me. So I cleaned up. When I sailed
for Europe I was a trifle more than three-quarters of a million to the good. To me that
looked like some balance.
I was in Aix-les-Bains enjoying myself. I had earned my vacation. It was good to be in a
place like that with plenty of money and friends and acquaintances and everybody intent
upon having a good time. Not much trouble about having that, in Aix. Wall Street was
so far away that I never thought about it, and that is more than I could say of any resort
in the United States. I didn't have to listen to talk about the stock market. I didn't need to
trade. I had enough to last me quite a long time, and besides, when I got back I knew
what to do to make much more than I could spend in Europe that summer.
One day I saw in the Paris Herald a dispatch from New York that Smelters had declared
an extra dividend. They had run up the price of the stock and the entire market had come
back quite strong. Of course that changed everything for me in Aix. The news simply
meant that the bull cliques were still fighting desperately against conditions against
common sense and against common honesty, for they knew what was coming and were
resorting to such schemes to put up the market in order to unload stocks before the storm
struck them. It is possible they really did not believe the danger was as serious or as
close at hand as I thought. The big men of the Street are as prone to be wishful thinkers
as the politicians or the plain suckers. I myself can't work that way. In a speculator such
an attitude is fatal. Perhaps a manufacturer of securities or a promoter of new enterprises
can afford to indulge in hope-jags.
At all events, I knew that all bull manipulation was foredoomed to failure in that bear
market. The instant I read the dispatch I knew there was only one thing to do to be
comfortable, and that was to sell Smelters short. Why, the insiders as much as begged
me on their knees to do it, when they increased the dividend rate on the verge of a
money panic. It was as infuriating as the old "dares" of your boyhood. They dared me to
sell that particular stock short.
I cabled some selling orders in Smelters and advised my friends in New York to go short
of it. When I got my report from the brokers I saw the price they got was six points
below the quotations I had seen in the Paris Herald. It shows you what the situation was.
My plans had been to return to Paris at the end of the month and about three weeks later
sail for New York, but as soon as I received the cabled reports from my brokers I went
back to Paris. The same day I arrived I called at the steamship offices and found there
was a fast boat leaving for New York the next day. I took it.
There I was, back in New York, almost a month ahead of my original plans, because it
was the most comfortable place to be short of the market in. I had well over half a
million in cash available for margins. My return was not due to my being bearish but to
my being logical.
I sold more stocks. As money got tighter call-money rates went higher and prices of
stocks lower. I had foreseen it. At first, my foresight broke me. But now I was right and
prospering. However, the real joy was in the consciousness that as a trader I was at last
on the right track. I still had much to learn but I knew what to do. No more floundering,
no more half-right methods. Tape reading was an important part of the game; so was
beginning at the right time; so was sticking to your position. But my greatest discovery
was that a man must study general conditions, to size them so as to be able to anticipate
probabilities. In short, I had learned that I had to work for my money. I was no longer
betting blindly or concerned with mastering the techniques of the game, but with earning
my successes by hard study and clear thinking. I also had found out that nobody was
immune from the danger of making sucker plays. And for a sucker play a man gets
sucker pay; for the paymaster is on the job and never loses the pay envelope that is
coming to you.
Our office made a great deal of money. My own operations were so successful that they
began to be talked about and, of course, were greatly exaggerated. I was credited with
starting the breaks in various stocks. People I didn't know by name used to come and
congratulate me. They all thought the most wonderful thing was the money I had made.
They did not say a word about the time when I first talked bearish to them and they
thought I was a crazy bear with a stock-market loser's vindictive grouch. That I had
foreseen the money troubles was nothing. That my brokers' bookkeeper had used a third
of a drop of ink on the credit side of the ledger under my name was a marvelous
achievement to them.
Friends used to tell me that in various offices the Boy Plunger in Harding Brothers'
office was quoted as making all sorts of threats against the bull cliques that had tried to
mark up prices of various stocks long after it was plain that the market was bound to
seek a much lower level. To this day they talk of my raids.
From the latter part of September on, the money market was megaphoning warnings to
the entire world. But a belief in miracles kept people from selling what remained of their
speculative holdings. Why, a broker told me a story the first week of October that made
me feel almost ashamed of my moderation.
You remember that money loans used to be made on the floor of the Exchange around
the Money Post. Those brokers who had received notice from their banks to pay call
loans knew in a general way how much money they would have to borrow afresh. And
of course the banks knew their position so far as loanable funds were concerned, and
those which had money to loan would send it to the Exchange. This bank money was
handled by a few brokers whose principal business was time loans. At about noon the
renewal rate for the day was posted. Usually this represented a fair average of the loans
made up to that time. Business was as a rule transacted openly by bids and offers, so that
everyone knew what was going on. Between noon and about two o'clock there was
ordinarily not much business done in money, but after delivery time namely, 2:15 p.m.
brokers would know exactly what their cash position for the day would be, and they
were able either to go to the Money Post and lend the balances that they had over or to
borrow what they required. This business also was done openly.
Well, sometime early in October the broker I was telling you about came to me and told
me that brokers were getting so they didn't go to the Money Post when they had money
to loan. The reason was that members of a couple of well-known commission houses
were on watch there, ready to snap up any offerings of money. Of course no lender who
offered money publicly could refuse to lend to these firms. They were solvent and the
collateral was good enough. But the trouble was that once these firms borrowed money
on call there was no prospect of the lender getting that money back. They simply said
they couldn't pay it back and the lender would willy-nilly have to renew the loan. So any
Stock Exchange house that had money to loan to its fellows used to send its men about
the floor instead of to the Post, and they would whisper to good friends, "Want a
hundred?" meaning, "Do you wish to borrow a hundred thousand dollars?" The money
brokers who acted for the banks presently adopted the same plan, and it was a dismal
sight to watch the Money Post. Think of it!
Why, he also told me that it was a matter of Stock Exchange etiquette in those October
days for the borrower to make his own rate of interest. You see, it fluctuated between
100 and 150 per cent per annum. I suppose by letting the borrower fix the rate the lender
in some strange way didn't feel so much like a usurer. But you bet he got as much as the
rest. The lender naturally did not dream of not paying a high rate. He played fair and
paid whatever the others did. What he needed was the money and was glad to get it.
Things got worse and worse. Finally there came the awful day of reckoning for the bulls
and the optimists and the wishful thinkers and those vast hordes that, dreading the pain
of a small loss at the beginning, were now about to suffer total amputation without
anaesthetics. A day I shall never forget, October 24, 1907.
Reports from the money crowd early indicated that borrowers would have to pay
whatever the lenders saw fit to ask. There wouldn't be enough to go around. That day the
money crowd was much larger than usual. When delivery time came that afternoon there
must have been a hundred brokers around the Money Post, each hoping to borrow the
money that his firm urgently needed. Without money they must sell what stocks they
were carrying on margin sell at any price they could get in a market where buyers were
as scarce as money and just then there was not a dollar in sight.
My friend's partner was as bearish as I was. The firm therefore did not have to borrow,
but my friend, the broker I told you about, fresh from seeing the haggard faces around
the Money Post, came to me. He knew I was heavily short of the entire market.
He said, "My God, Larry! I don't know what's going to happen. I never saw anything
like it. It can't go on. Something has got to give. It looks to me as if everybody is busted
right now. You can't sell stocks, and there is absolutely no money in there."
"How do you mean?" I asked.
But what he answered was, "Did you ever hear of the classroom experiment of the
mouse in a glass-bell when they begin to pump the air out of the bell? You can see the
poor mouse breathe faster and faster, its sides heaving like overworked bellows, trying
to get enough oxygen out of the decreasing supply in the bell. You watch it suffocate till
its eyes almost pop out of their sockets, gasping, dying. Well, that is what I think of
when I see the crowd at the Money Post! No money anywhere, and you can't liquidate
stocks because there is nobody to buy them. The whole Street is broke at this very
moment, if you ask me!"
It made me think. I had seen a smash coming, but not, I admit, the worst panic in our
history. It might not be profitable to anybody if it went much further.
Finally it became plain that there was no use in waiting at the Post for money. There
wasn't going to be any. Then hell broke loose.
The president of the Stock Exchange, Mr. R. H. Thomas, so I heard later in the day,
knowing that every house in the Street was headed for disaster, went out in search of
succour. He called on James Stillman, president of the National City Bank, the richest
bank in the United States. Its boast was that it never loaned money at a higher rate than 6
per cent.
Stillman heard what the president of the New York Stock Exchange had to say. Then he
said, "Mr. Thomas, we'll have to go and see Mr. Morgan about this."
The two men, hoping to stave off the most disastrous panic in our financial history, went
together to the office of J. P. Morgan & Co. and saw Mr. Morgan. Mr. Thomas laid the
case before him. The moment he got through speaking Mr. Morgan said, "Go back to the
Exchange and tell them that there will be money for them."
"Where?"
"At the banks!"
So strong was the faith of all men in Mr. Morgan in those critical times that Thomas
didn't wait for further details but rushed back to the floor of the Exchange to announce
the reprieve to his death-sentenced fellow members.
Then, before half past two in the afternoon, J. P. Morgan sent John T. Atterbury, of Van
Emburgh & Atterbury, who was known to have close relations with J. P. Morgan & Co.,
into the money crowd. My friend said that the old broker walked quickly to the Money
Post. He raised his hand like an exhorter at a revival meeting. The crowd, that at first
had been calmed down somewhat by President Thomas' announcement, was beginning
to fear that the relief plans had miscarried and the worst was still to come. But when
they looked at Mr. Atterbury's face and saw him raise his hand they promptly petrified
themselves.
In the dead silence that followed, Mr. Atterbury said, "I am authorized to lend ten
million dollars. Take it easy! There will be enough for everybody!"
Then he began. Instead of giving to each borrower the name of the lender he simply
jotted down the name of the borrower and the amount of the loan and told the borrower,
"You will be told where your money is." He meant the name of the bank from which the
borrower would get the money later.
I heard a day or two later that Mr. Morgan simply sent word to the frightened bankers of
New York that they mnst provide the money the Stock Exchange needed.
"But we haven't got any. We're loaned up to the hilt," the banks protested.
"You've got your reserves," snapped J. P.
"But we're already below the legal limit," they howled
"Use them! That's what reserves are for!" And the banks obeyed and invaded the
reserves to the extent of about twenty million dollars. It saved the stock market. The
bank panic didn't come until the following week. He was a man, J. P. Morgan was. They
don't come much bigger.
That was the day I remember most vividly of all the days of my life as a stock operator.
It was the day when my winnings exceeded one million dollars. It marked the successful
ending of my first deliberately planned trading campaign. What I had foreseen had come
to pass. But more than all these things was this: a wild dream of mine had been realised.
I had been king for a day!
I'll explain, of course. After I had been in New York a couple of years I used to cudgel
my brains trying to determine the exact reason why I couldn't beat in a Stock Exchange
house in New York the game that I had beaten as a kid of fifteen in a bucket shop in
Boston. I knew that some day I would find out what was wrong and I would stop being
wrong. I would then have not alone the will to be right but the knowledge to insure my
being right. And that would mean power.
Please do not misunderstand me. It was not a deliberate dream of grandeur or a futile
desire born of overweening vanity. It was rather a sort of feeling that the same old stock
market that so baffled me in Fullerton's office and in Hoarding's would one day eat out
of my hand. I just felt that such a day would come. And it did October 24, 1907.
The reason why I say it is this: That morning a broker who had done a lot of business for
my brokers and knew that I had been plunging on the bear side rode down in the
company of one of the partners of the foremost banking house in the Street. My friend
told the banker how heavily I had been trading, for I certainly pushed my luck to the
limit. What is the use of being right unless you get all the good possible out of it?
Perhaps the broker exaggerated to make his story sound important. Perhaps I had more
of a following than I knew. Perhaps the banker knew far better than I how critical the
situation was. At all events, my friend said to me: "He listened with great interest to
what I told him you said the market was going to do when the real selling began, after
another push or two. When I got through he said he might have something for me to do
later in the day."
When the commission houses found out there was not a cent to be had at any price I
knew the time had come. I sent brokers into the various crowds. Why, at one time there
wasn't a single bid for Union Pacific. Not at any price! Think of it! And in other stocks
the same thing. No money to hold stocks and nobody to buy them.
I had enormous paper profits and the certainty that all that I had to do to smash prices
still more was to send in orders to sell ten thousand shares each of Union Pacific and of
a half dozen other good dividend-paying stocks and what would follow would be simply
hell. It seemed to me that the panic that would be precipitated would be of such an
intensity and character that the board of governors would deem it advisable to close the
Exchange, as was done in August, 1914, when the World War broke out.
It would mean greatly increased profits on paper. It might also mean an inability to
convert those profits into actual cash. But there were other things to consider, and one
was that a further break would retard the recovery that I was beginning to figure on, the
compensating improvement after all that bloodletting. Such a panic would do much
harm to the country generally.
I made up my mind that since it was unwise and unpleasant to continue actively bearish
it was illogical for me to stay short. So I turned and began to buy.
It wasn't long after my brokers began to buy in for me and, by the way, I got bottom
prices that the banker sent for my friend.
"I have sent for you," he said, "because I want you to go instantly to your friend
Livingston and say to him mat we hope he will not sell any more stocks to-day. The
market can't stand much more pressure. As it is, it will be an immensely difficult task to
avert a devastating panic. Appeal to your friend's patriotism. This is a case where a man
has to work for the benefit of all. Let me know at once what he says."
My friend came right over and told me. He was very tactful. I suppose he thought that
having planned to smash the market I would consider his request as equivalent to
throwing away the chance to make about ten million dollars. He knew I was sore on
some of the big guns for the way they had acted trying to land the public with a lot of
stock when they knew as well as I did what was coming.
As a matter of fact, the big men were big sufferers and lots of the stocks I bought at the
very bottom were in famous financial names. I didn't know it at the time, but it did not
matter. I had practically covered all my shorts and it seemed to me there was a chance to
buy stocks cheap and help the needed recovery in prices at the same time if nobody
hammered the market.
So I told my friend, "Go back and tell Mr. Blank that I agree with them and that I fully
realised the gravity of the situation even before he sent for you. I not only will not sell
any more stocks to-day, but I am going in and buy as much as I can carry." And I kept
my word. I bought one hundred thousand shares that day, for the long account. I did not
sell another stock short for nine months.
That is why I said to friends that my dream had come true and that I had been king for a
moment. The stock market at one time that day certainly was at the mercy of anybody
who wanted to hammer it. I do not surfer from delusions of grandeur; in fact you know
how I feel about being accused of raiding the market and about the way my operations
are exaggerated by the gossip of the Street.
I came out of it in fine shape. The newspapers said that Larry Livingston, the Boy
Plunger, had made several millions. Well, I was worth over one million after the close of
business that day. But my biggest winnings were not in dollars but in the intangibles: I
had been right, I had looked ahead and followed a clear-cut plan. I had learned what a
man must do in order to make big money; I was permanently out of
the gambler class; I had at last learned to trade intelligently in a big way. It was a day of
days for me.


Chapter X
The recognition of our own mistakes should not benefit us any more than the study of
our successes. But there is a natural tendency in all men to avoid punishment. When you
associate certain mistakes with a licking, you do not hanker for a second dose, and, of
course, all stock-market mistakes wound you in two tender spots your pocketbook and
your vanity. But I will tell you something curious : A stock speculator sometimes makes
mistakes and knows that he is making them. And after he makes them he will ask
himself why he made them; and after thinking over it cold-bloodedly a long time after
the pain of punishment is over he may learn how he came to make them, and when, and
at what particular point of his trade ; but not why. And then he simply calls himself
names and lets it go at that.
Of course, if a man is both wise and lucky, he will not make the same mistake twice. But
he will make any one of the ten thousand brothers or cousins of the original. The
Mistake family is so large that there is always one of them around when you want to see
what you can do in the fool-play line.
To tell you about the first of my million-dollar mistakes I shall have to go back to this
time when I first became a millionaire, right after the big break of October, 1907. As far
as my trading went, having a million merely meant more reserves. Money does not give
a trader more comfort, because, rich or poor, he can make mistakes and it is never
comfortable to be wrong. And when a millionaire is right his money is merely one of his
several servants. Losing money is the least of my troubles. A loss never bothers me after
I take it. I forget it Overnight. But being wrong not taking the loss that is what does the
damage to the pocketbook and to the soul. You remember Dickson G. Watts' story about
the man who was so nervous that a friend asked him what was the matter.
"I can't sleep," answered the nervous one.
"Why not?" asked the friend.
"I am carrying so much cotton that I can't sleep thinking about it. It is wearing me out.
What can I do?"
"Sell down to the sleeping point," answered the friend.
As a rule a man adapts himself to conditions so quickly that he loses the perspective. He
does not feel the difference much that is, he does not vividly remember how it felt not to
be a millionaire. He only remembers that there were things he could not do that he can
do now. It does not take a reasonably young and normal man very long to lose the habit
of being poor. It requires a little longer to forget that he used to be rich. I suppose that is
because money creates needs or encourages their multiplication. I mean that after a man
makes money in the stock market he very quickly loses the habit of not spending. But
after he loses his money it takes him a long time to lose the habit of spending.
After I took in my shorts and went long in October, 1907, I decided to take it easy for a
while. I bought a yacht and planned to go off on a cruise in Southern waters. I am crazy
about fishing and I was due to have the time of my life. I looked forward to it and
expected to go any day. But I did not. The market wouldn't let me.
I always have traded in commodities as well as in stocks. I began as a youngster in the
bucket shops. I studied those markets for years, though perhaps not so assiduously as the
stock market. As a matter of fact, I would rather play commodities than stocks. There is
no question about their greater legitimacy, as it were. It partakes more of the nature of a
commercial venture than trading in stocks does. A man can approach it as he might any
mercantile problem. It may be possible to use fictitious arguments for or against a
certain trend in a commodity market; but success will be only temporary, for in the end
the facts are bound to prevail, so that a trader gets dividends on study and observation,
as he does in a regular business. He can watch and weigh conditions and he knows as
much about it as anyone else. He need not guard against inside cliques. Dividends are
not unexpectedly passed or increased overnight in the cotton market or in wheat or corn.
In the long run commodity prices are governed but by one law the economic law of
demand and supply. The business of the trader in commodities is simply to get facts
about the demand and the supply, present and prospective. He does not indulge in
guesses about a dozen things as he does in stocks. It always appealed to me trading in
commodities.
Of course the same things happen in all speculative markets. The message of the tape is
the same. That will be perfectly plain to anyone who will take the trouble to think. He
will find if he asks himself questions and considers conditions, that the answers will
supply themselves directly. But people never take the trouble to ask questions, leave
alone seeking answers. The average American is from Missouri everywhere and at all
times except when he goes to the brokers' offices and looks at the tape, whether it is
stocks or commodities. The one game of all games that really requires study before
making a play is the one he goes into without his usual highly intelligent preliminary
and precautionary doubts. He will risk half his fortune in the stock market with less
reflection than he devotes to the selection of a medium-priced automobile.
This matter of tape reading is not so complicated as it appears. Of course you need
experience. But it is even more important to keep certain fundamentals in mind. To read
the tape is not to have your fortune told. The tape does not tell you how much you will
surely be worth next Thursday at 1:35 p.m. The object of reading the tape is to ascertain,
first, how and, next, when to trade that is, whether it is wiser to buy than to sell. It works
exactly the same for stocks as for cotton or wheat or corn or oats.
You watch the market that is, the course of prices as recorded by the tape with one
object: to determine the direction that is, the price tendency. Prices, we know, will move
either up or down according to the resistance they encounter. For purposes of easy
explanation we will say that prices, like everything else, move along the line of least
resistance. They will do whatever comes easiest, therefore they will go up if there is less
resistance to an advance than to a decline; and vice versa.
Nobody should be puzzled as to whether a market is a bull or a bear market after it fairly
starts. The trend is evident to a man who has an open mind and reasonably clear sight,
for it is never wise for a speculator to fit his facts to his theories. Such a man will, or
ought to, know whether it is a bull or a bear market, and if he knows that he knows
whether to buy or to sell. It is therefore at the very inception of the movement that a man
needs to know whether to buy or to sell.
Let us say, for example, that the market, as it usually does in those between-swings
times, fluctuates within a range of ten points; up to 130 and down to 120. It may look
very weak at the bottom; or, on the way up, after a rise of eight or ten points, it may look
as strong as anything. A man ought not to be led into trading by tokens. He should wait
until the tape tells him that the time is ripe. As a matter of fact, millions upon millions of
dollars have been lost by men who bought stocks because they looked cheap or sold
them because they looked dear. The speculator is not an investor. His object is not to
secure a steady return on his money at a good rate of interest, but to profit by either a
rise or a fall in the price of whatever he may be speculating in. Therefore the thing to
determine is the speculative line of least resistance at the moment of trading; and what
he should wait for is the moment when that line defines itself, because that is his signal
to get busy.
Reading the tape merely enables him to see that at 130 the selling had been stronger than
the buying and a reaction in the price logically followed. Up to the point where the
selling prevailed over the buying, superficial students of the tape may conclude that the
price is not going to stop short of 150, and they buy. But after the reaction begins they
hold on, or sell out at a small loss, or they go short and talk bearish. But at 120 there is
stronger resistance to the decline. The buying prevails over the selling, there is a rally
and the shorts cover. The public is so often whipsawed that one marvels at their
persistence in not learning their lesson.
Eventually something happens that increases the power of either the upward or the
downward force and the point of greatest resistance moves up or down that is, the
buying at 130 will for the first time be stronger than the selling, or the selling at 120 be
stronger than the buying. The price will break through the old barrier or movement-limit
and go on. As a rule, there is always a crowd of traders who are short at 120 because it
looked so weak, or long at 130 because it looked so strong, and, when the market goes
against them they are forced, after a while, either to change their minds and turn or to
close out, In either event they help to define even more clearly the price line of least
resistance. Thus the intelligent trader who has patiently waited to determine this line will
enlist the aid of fundamental trade conditions and also of the force of the trading of that
part of the community that happened to guess wrong and must now rectify mistakes.
Such corrections tend to push prices along the line of least resistance.
And right here I will say that, though I do not give it as a mathematical certainty or as an
axiom of speculation, my experience has been that accidents that is, the unexpected or
unforeseen have always helped me in my market position whenever the latter has been
based upon my determination of the line of least resistance. Do you remember that
Union Pacific episode at Saratoga that I told you about? Well, I was long because I
found out that the line of least resistance was upward. I should have stayed long instead
of letting my broker tell me that insiders were selling stocks. It didn't make any
difference what was going on in the directors' minds. That was something I couldn't
possibly know. But I could and did know that the tape said: "Going up!" And then came
the unexpected raising of the dividend rate and the thirty-point rise in the stock. At 164
prices looked mighty high, but as I told you before, stocks are never too high to buy or
too low to sell. The price, per se, has nothing to do with establishing my line of least
resistance.
You will find in actual practice that if you trade as I have indicated any important piece
of news given out between the closing of one market and the opening of another is
usually in harmony with the line of least resistance. The trend has been established
before the news is published, and in bull markets bear items are ignored and bull news
exaggerated, and vice versa. Before the war broke out the market was in a very weak
condition. There came the proclamation of Germany's submarine policy. I was short one
hundred and fifty thousand shares of stock, not because I knew the news was coming,
but because I was going along the line of least resistance. What happened came out of a
clear sky, as far as my play was concerned. Of course I took advantage of the situation
and I covered my shorts that day.
It sounds very easy to say that all you have to do is to watch the tape, establish your
resistance points and be ready to trade along the line of least resistance as soon as you
have determined it. But in actual practice a man has to guard against many things, and
most of all against himself that is, against human nature. That is the reason why I say
that the man who is right always has two forces working in his favor basic conditions
and the men who are wrong. In a bull market bear factors are ignored. That is human
nature, and yet human beings profess astonishment at it. People will tell you that the
wheat crop has gone to pot because there has been bad weather in one or two sections
and some farmers have been ruined. When the entire crop is gathered and all the farmers
in all the wheat-growing sections begin to take their wheat to the elevators the bulls are
surprised at the smallness of the damage. They discover that they merely have helped
the bears.
When a man makes his play in a commodity market he must not permit himself set
opinions. He must have an open mind and flexibility. It is not wise to disregard the
message of the tape, no matter what your opinion of crop conditions or of the probable
demand may be. I recall how I missed a big play just by trying to anticipate the starting
signal. I felt so sure of conditions that I thought it was not necessary to wait for the line
of least resistance to define itself. I even thought I might help it arrive, because it looked
as if it merely needed a little assistance.
I was very bullish on cotton. It was hanging around twelve cents, running up and down
within a moderate range. It was in one of those in-between places and I could see it. I
knew I really ought to wait. But I got to thinking that if I gave it a little push it would go
beyond the upper resistance point.
I bought fifty thousand bales. Sure enough, it moved up. And sure enough, as soon as I
stopped buying it stopped going up. Then it began to settle back to where it was when I
began buying it. I got out and it stopped going down. I thought I was now much nearer
the starting signal, and presently I thought I'd start it myself again. I did. The same thing
happened. I bid it up, only to see it go down when I stopped. I did this four or five times
until I finally quit in disgust. It cost me about two hundred thousand dollars. I was done
with it. It wasn't very long after that when it began to go up and never stopped till it got
to a price that would have meant a killing for me if I hadn't been in such a great hurry to
start.
This experience has been the experience of so many traders so many times that I can
give this rule: In a narrow market, when prices are not getting anywhere to speak of but
move within a narrow range, there is no sense in trying to anticipate what the next big
movement is going to be up or down. The thing to do is to watch the market, read the
tape to determine the limits of the get-nowhere prices, and make up your mind that you
will not take an interest until the price breaks through the limit in either direction. A
speculator must concern himself with making money out of the market and not with
insisting that the tape must agree with him. Never argue with it or ask it for reasons or
explanations. Stock-market postmortems don't pay dividends.
Not so long ago I was with a party of friends. They got to talking wheat. Some of them
were bullish and others bearish. Finally they asked me what I thought. Well, I had been
studying the market for some time. I knew they did not want any statistics or analyses of
conditions. So I said: "If you want to make some money out of wheat I can tell you how
to do it."
They all said they did and I told them, "If you are sure you wish to make money in
wheat just you watch it. Wait. The moment it crosses $1.20 buy it and you will get a
nice quick play in it!"
"Why not buy it now, at $1.14?" one of the party asked.
"Because I don't know yet that it is going up at all."
"Then why buy it at $1.20? It seems a mighty high price."
"Do you wish to gamble blindly in the hope of getting a great big profit or do you wish
to speculate intelligently and get a smaller but much more probable profit?"
They all said they wanted the smaller but surer profit, so I said, "Then do as I tell you. If
it crosses $1.20 buy."
As I told you, I had watched it a long time. For months it sold between $1.10 and $1.20,
getting nowhere in particular. Well, sir, one day it closed at above $1.19. I got ready for
it, Sure enough the next day it opened at $1.20-1/2, and I bought. It went to $1.21, to
$1.22, to $1.23, to $1.25, and I went with it.
Now I couldn't have told you at the time just what was going on. I didn't get any
explanations about its behaviour during the course of the limited fluctuations. I couldn't
tell whether the breaking through the limit would be up through $1.20 or down through
$1.10, though I suspected it would be up because there was not enough wheat in the
world for a big break in prices.
As a matter of fact, it seems Europe had been buying quietly and a lot of traders had
gone short of it at around $1.19. Owing to the European purchases and other causes, a
lot of wheat had been taken out of the market, so that finally the big movement got
started. The price went beyond the $1.20 mark. That was all the point I had and it was
all I needed. I knew that when it crossed $1.20 it would be because the upward
movement at last had gathered force to push it over the limit and something had to
happen. In other words, by crossing $1.20 the line of least resistance of wheat prices was
established. It was a different story then.
I remember that one day was a holiday with us and all our markets were closed. Well, in
Winnipeg wheat opened up six cents a bushel. When our market opened on the
following day, it also was up six cents a bushel. The price just went along the line of
least resistance.
What I have told you gives you the essence of my trading system as based on studying
the tape. I merely learn the way prices are most probably going to move. I check up my
own trading by additional tests, to determine the psychological moment. I do that by
watching the way the price acts after I begin.
It is surprising how many experienced traders there are who look incredulous when I tell
them that when I buy stocks for a rise I like to pay top prices and when I sell I must sell
low or not at all. It would not be so difficult to make money if a trader always stuck to
his speculative guns that is, waited for the line of least resistance to define itself and
began buying only when the tape said up or selling only when it said down. He should
accumulate his line on the way up. Let him buy one-fifth of his full line. If that does not
show him a profit he must not increase his holdings because he has obviously begun
wrong; he is wrong temporarily and there is no profit in being wrong at any time. The
same tape that said UP did not necessarily lie merely because it is now saying NOT
YET.
In cotton I was very successful in my trading for a long time. I had my theory about it
and I absolutely lived up to it. Suppose I had decided that my line would be forty to fifty
thousand bales. Well, I would study the tape as I told you, watching for an opportunity
either to buy or to sell. Suppose the line of least resistance indicated a bull movement.
Well, I would buy ten thousand bales. After I got through buying that, if the market went
up ten points over my initial purchase price, I would take on another ten thousand bales.
Same thing. Then, if I could get twenty points' profit, or one dollar a bale, I would buy
twenty thousand more. That would give me my line my basis for my trading. But if after
buying the first ten or twenty thousand bales, it showed me a loss, out I'd go. I was
wrong. It might be I was only temporarily wrong. But as I have said before it doesn't pay
to start wrong in anything.
What I accomplished by sticking to my system was that I always had a line of cotton in
every real movement. In the course of accumulating my full line I might chip out fifty or
sixty thousand dollars in these feeling-out plays of mine. This looks like a very
expensive testing, but it wasn't. After the real movement started, how long would it take
me to make up the fifty thousand dollars I had dropped in order to make sure that I
began to load up at exactly the right time? No time at all! It always pays a man to be
right at the right time.
As I think I also said before, this describes what I may call my system for placing my
bets. It is simple arithmetic to prove that it is a wise thing to have the big bet down only
when you win, and when you lose to lose only a small exploratory bet, as it were. If a
man trades in the way I have described, he will always be in the profitable position of
being able to cash in on the big bet.
Professional traders have always had some system or other based upon their experience
and governed either by their attitude toward speculation or by their desires. I remember I
met an old gentleman in Palm Beach whose name I did not catch or did not at once
identify. I knew he had been in the Street for years, way back in Civil War times, and
somebody told me that he was a very wise old codger who had gone through so many
booms and panics that he was always saying there was nothing new under the sun and
least of all in the stock market.
The old fellow asked me a lot of questions. When I got through telling him about my
usual practice in trading he nodded and said, "Yes! Yes! You're right. The way you're
built, the way your mind runs, makes your system a good system for you. It comes easy
for you to practice what you preach, because the money you bet is the least of your
cares. I recollect Pat Hearne. Ever hear of him? Well, he was a very well-known
sporting man and he had an account with us. Clever chap and nervy. He made money in
stocks, and that made people ask him for advice. He would never give any. If they asked
him point-blank for his opinion about the wisdom of their commitments he used a
favourite race-track maxim of his: "You can't tell till you bet." He traded in our office.
He would buy one hundred shares of some active stock and when, or if, it went up I per
cent he would buy another hundred. On another point's advance, another hundred shares;
and so on. He used to say he wasn't playing the game to make money for others and
therefore he would put in a stop-loss order one point below the price of his last purchase.
When the price kept going tip he simply moved up his stop with it. On a I per cent
reaction he was stopped out. He declared he did not see any sense in losing more than
one point, whether it came out of his original margin or out of his paper profits.
"You know, a professional gambler is not looking for long shots, but for sure money. Of
course long shots are fine when they come in. In the stock market Pat wasn't after tips or
playing to catch twenty-points-a-week advances, but sure money in sufficient quantity to
provide him with a good living. Of all the thousands of outsiders that I have run across
in Wall Street, Pat Hearne was the only one who saw in stock speculation merely a game
of chance like faro or roulette, but, nevertheless, had the sense to stick to a relatively
sound betting method.
"After Hearne's death one of our customers who had always traded with Pat and used his
system made over one hundred thousand dollars in Lackawanna. Then he switched over
to some other stock and because he had made a big stake he thought he need not stick to
Pat's way. When a reaction came, instead of cutting short his losses he let them run as
though they were profits. Of course every cent went. When he finally quit he owed us
several thousand dollars.
"He hung around for two or three years. He kept the fever long after the cash had gone;
but we did not object as long as he behaved himself. I remember that he used to admit
freely that he had been ten thousand kinds of an ass not to stick to Pat Hearne's style of
play. Well, one day he came to me greatly excited and asked me to let him sell some
stock short in our office. He was a nice enough chap who had been a good customer in
his day and I told him I personally would guarantee his account for one hundred shares.
"He sold short one hundred shares of Lake Shore. That was the time Bill Travers
hammered the market, in 1875. My friend Roberts put out that Lake Shore at exactly the
right time and kept selling it on the way down as he had been wont to do in the old
successful days before he forsook Pat Hearne's system and instead listened to hope's
whispers.
"Well, sir, in four days of successful pyramiding, Roberts' account showed him a profit
of fifteen thousand dollars. Observing that he had not put in a stop-loss order I spoke to
him about it and he told me that the break hadn't fairly begun and he wasn't going to be
shaken out by any one-point reaction. This was in August. Before the middle of
September he borrowed ten dollars from me for a baby carriage his fourth, He did not
stick to his own proved system. That's the trouble with most of them," and the old fellow
shook his head at me.
And he was right. I sometimes think that speculation must be an unnatural sort of
business, because I find that the average speculator has arrayed against him his own
nature. The weaknesses that all men are prone to are fatal to success in speculation
usually those very weaknesses that make him likable to his fellows or that he himself
particularly guards against in those other ventures of his where they are not nearly so
dangerous as when he is trading in stocks or commodities.
The speculator's chief enemies are always boring from within. It is inseparable from
human nature to hope and to fear. In speculation when the market goes against you you
hope that every day will be the last day and you lose more than you should had you not
listened to hope to the same ally that is so potent a success-bringer to empire builders
and pioneers, big and little. And when the market goes your way you become fearful
that the next day will take away your profit, and you get out too soon. Fear keeps you
from making as much money as you ought to. The successful trader has to fight these
two deep-seated instincts. He has to reverse what you might call his natural impulses.
Instead of hoping he must fear; instead of fearing he must hope. He must fear that his
loss may develop into a much bigger loss, and hope that his profit may become a big
profit. It is absolutely wrong to gamble in stocks the way the average man does.
I have been in the speculative game ever since I was fourteen. It is all I have ever done. I
think I know what I am talking about. And the conclusion that I have reached after
nearly thirty years of constant trading, both on a shoestring and with millions of dollars
back of me, is this: A man may beat a stock or a group at a certain time, but no man
living can beat the stock market! A man may make money out of individual deals in
cotton or grain, but no man can beat the cotton market or the grain market. It's like the
track. A man may beat a horse race, but he cannot beat horse racing.
If I knew how to make these statements stronger or more emphatic I certainly would. It
does not make any difference what anybody says to the contrary. I know I am right in
saying these are incontrovertible statements.


Chapter XI
And now I'll get back to October, 1907. I bought a yacht and made all preparations to
leave New York for a cruise in Southern waters. I am really daffy about fishing and this
was the time when I was going to fish
to my heart's content from my own yacht, going wherever I wished whenever I felt like
it. Everything was ready. I had made a killing in stocks, but at the last moment corn held
me back.
I must explain that before the money panic which gave me ray first million I had been
trading in grain at Chicago. I was short ten million bushels of wheat and ten million
bushels of corn. I had studied the grain markets for a long time and was as bearish on
corn and wheat as I had been on stocks.
Well, they both started down, but while wheat kept on de-dining the biggest of all the
Chicago operators I'll call him Stratton took it into his head to run a corner in corn. After
I cleaned up in stocks and was ready to go South on my yacht I found that wheat showed
me a handsome profit, but in corn Stratton had run up the price and I had quite a loss.
I knew there was much more corn in the country than the price indicated. The law of
demand and supply worked as always. But the demand came chiefly from Stratton and
the supply was not coming at all, because there was an acute congestion in the
movement of corn. I remember that I used to pray for a cold spell that would freeze the
impassable roads and enable the farmers to bring their corn into the market. But no such
luck.
There I was, waiting to go on my joyously planned fishing trip and that loss in corn
holding me back. I couldn't go away with the market as it was. Of course Stratton kept
pretty close tabs on the short interest. He knew he had me, and I knew it quite as well as
he did. But, as I said, I was hoping I might convince the weather that it ought to get busy
and help me. Perceiving that neither the weather nor any other kindly wonder-worker
was paying any attention to my needs I studied how I might work out of my difficulty by
my own efforts.
I closed out my line of wheat at a good profit. But the problem in corn was infinitely
more difficult. If I could have covered my ten million bushels at the prevailing prices I
instantly and gladly would have done so, large though the loss would have been. But, of
course, the moment I started to buy in my corn Stratton would be on the job as squeezer
in chief, and I no more relished running up the price on myself by reason of my own
purchases than cutting my own throat with my own knife.
Strong though corn was, my desire to go fishing was even stronger, so it was up to me to
find a way out at once. I must conduct a strategic retreat. I must buy back the ten million
bushels I was short of and in so doing keep down my loss as much as I possibly could.
It so happened that Stratton at that time was also running a deal in oats and had the
market pretty well sewed up. I had kept track of all the grain markets in the way of crop
news and pit gossip, and I heard that the powerful Armour interests were not friendly,
marketwise, to Stratton. Of course I knew that Stratton would not let me have the corn I
needed except at his own price, but the moment I heard the rumors about Armour being
against Stratton it occurred to me that I might look to the Chicago traders for aid. The
only way in which they could possibly help me was for them to sell me the corn that
Stratton wouldn't. The rest was easy.
First, I put in orders to buy five hundred thousand bushels of corn every eighth of a cent
down. After these orders were in I gave to each of four houses an order to sell
simultaneously fifty thousand bushels of oats at the market. That, I figured, ought to
make a quick break in oats. Knowing how the traders' minds worked, it was a cinch that
they would instantly think that Armour was gunning for Stratton. Seeing the attack
opened in oats they would logically conclude that the next break would be in corn and
they would start to sell it. If that corner in corn was busted, the pickings would be
fabulous.
My dope on the psychology of the Chicago traders was absolutely correct. When they
saw oats breaking on the scattered selling they promptly jumped on corn and sold it with
great enthusiasm. I was able to buy six million bushels of corn in the next ten minutes.
The moment I found that their selling of corn ceased I simply bought in the other four
million bushels at the market. Of course that made the price go up again, but the net
result of my maneuver was that I covered the entire line of ten million bushels within
one-half cent of the price prevailing at the time I started to cover on the traders' selling.
The two hundred thousand bushels of oats that I sold short to start the traders' selling of
corn I covered at a loss of only three thousand dollars. That was pretty cheap bear bait.
The profits I had made in wheat offset so much of my deficit in corn that my total loss
on all my grain trades that time was only twenty-five thousand dollars. Afterwards corn
went up twenty-five cents a bushed. Stratton undoubtedly had me at his mercy. If I had
set about buying my ten million bushels of corn without bothering to think of the price
there is no telling what I would have had to pay.
A man can't spend years at one thing and not acquire a habitual attitude towards it quite
unlike that of the average beginner. The difference distinguishes the professional from
the amateur. It is the way a man looks at things that makes or loses money for him in the
speculative markets. The public has the dilettante's point of view toward his own effort.
The ego obtrudes itself unduly and the thinking therefore is not deep or exhaustive. The
professional concerns himself with doing the right thing rather than with making money,
knowing that the profit takes care of itself if the other things are attended to. A trader
gets to play the game as the professional billiard player does that is, he looks far ahead
instead of considering the particular shot before him. It gets to be an instinct to play for
position.
I remember hearing a story about Addison Cammack that illustrates very nicely what I
wish to point out. From all I have heard, I am inclined to think that Cammack was one of
the ablest stock traders the Street ever saw. He was not a chronic bear as many believe,
but he felt the greater appeal of trading on the bear side, of utilising in his behalf the two
great human factors of hope and fear. He is credited with coining the warning: "Don't
sell stocks when the sap is running up the trees!" and the old-timers tell me that his
biggest winnings were made on the bull side, so that it is plain he did not play prejudices
but conditions. At all events, he was a consummate trader. It seems that once this was
way back at the tag end of a bull market Cammack was bearish, and J. Arthur Joseph,
the financial writer and raconteur, knew it. The market, however, was not only strong
but still rising, in response to prodding by the bull leaders and optimistic reports by the
newspapers. Knowing what use a trader like Cammack could make of bearish
information, Joseph rushed to Cammack's office one day with glad tidings.
"Mr. Cammack, I have a very good friend who is a transfer clerk in the St. Paul office
and he has just told me something which I think you ought to know."
"What is it?" asked Cammack listlessly.
"You've turned, haven't you? You are bearish now?" asked Joseph, to make sure. If
Cammack wasn't interested he wasn't going to waste precious ammunition.
"Yes. What's the wonderful information?"
"I went around to the St. Paul office to-day, as I do in my news-gathering rounds two or
three times a week, and my friend there said to me: 'The Old Man is selling stock.' He
meant William Rockefeller. 'Is he really, Jimmy?' I said to him, and he answered, 'Yes;
he is selling fifteen hundred shares every three-eighths of a point up. I've been
transferring the stock for two or three days now.' I didn't lose any time, but came right
over to tell you."
Cammack was not easily excited, and, moreover, was so accustomed to having all
manner of people rush madly into his office with all manner of news, gossip, rumors,
tips and lies that he had grown distrustful of them all. He merely said now, "Are you
sure you heard right, Joseph?"
"Am I sure? Certainly I am sure! Do you think" I am deaf?" said Joseph.
"Are you sure of your man?"
"Absolutely!" declared Joseph. "I've known him for years. He has never lied to me. He
wouldn't! No object! I know he is absolutely reliable and I'd stake my life on what he
tells me. I know him as well as I know anybody in this world a great deal better than you
seem to know me, after all these years."
"Sure of him, eh?" And Cammack again looked at Joseph. Then he said, "Well, you
ought to know." He called his broker, W. B. Wheeler. Joseph expected to hear him give
an order to sell at least fifty thousand shares of St. Paul. William Rockefeller was
disposing of his holdings in St. Paul, taking advantage of the strength of the market.
Whether it was investment stock or speculative holdings was irrelevant. The one
important fact was that the best stock trader of the Standard Oil crowd was getting out of
St. Paul. What would the average man have done if he had received the news from a
trustworthy source? No need to ask.
But Cammack, the ablest bear operator of his day, who was bearish on the market just
then, said to his broker, "Billy, go over to the board and buy fifteen hundred St. Paul
every three-eighths up." The stock was then in the nineties.
"Don't you mean sell?" interjected Joseph hastily. He was no novice in Wall Street, but
he was thinking of the market from the point of view of the newspaper man and,
incidentally, of the general public. The price certainly ought to go down on the news of
inside selling. And there was no better inside selling than Mr. William Rockefeller's.
The Standard Oil getting out and Cammack buying! It couldn't be!
"No," said Cammack; "I mean buy!"
"Don't you believe me?"
"Yes!"
"Don't you believe my information?"
"Yes." '
"Aren't you bearish?"
"Yes."
"Well, then?"
"That's why I'm buying. Listen to me now: You keep in touch with that reliable friend of
yours and the moment the scaled selling stops, let me know. Instantly! Do you
understand?"
"Yes," said Joseph, and went away, not quite sure he could fathom Cammack's motives
in buying William Rockefeller's stock. It was the knowledge that Cammack was bearish
on the entire market that made his manoeuvre so difficult to explain. However, Joseph
saw his friend the transfer clerk and told him he wanted to be tipped off when the Old
Man got through selling. Regularly twice a day Joseph called on his friend to inquire.
One day the transfer clerk told him, "There isn't any more stock coming from the Old
Man." Joseph thanked him and ran to Cammack's office with the information.
Cammack listened attentively, turned to Wheeler and asked, "Billy, how much St. Paul
have we got in the office?" Wheeler looked it up and reported that they had accumulated
about sixty thousand shares.
Cammack, being bearish, had been putting out short lines in the other Grangers as well
as in various other stocks, even before he began to buy St. Paul. He was now heavily
short of the market. He promptly ordered Wheeler to sell the sixty thousand shares of St.
Paul that they were long of, and more besides. He used his long holdings of St. Paul as a
lever to depress the general list and greatly benefit his operations for a decline.
St. Paul didn't stop on that move until it reached forty-four and Cammack made a killing
in it. He played his cards with consummate skill and profited accordingly. The point I
would make is his habitual attitude toward trading. He didn't have to reflect. He saw
instantly what was far more important to him than his profit on that one stock. He saw
that he had providentially been offered an opportunity to begin his big bear operations
not only at the proper time but with a proper initial push. The St. Paul tip made him buy
instead of sell because he saw at once that it gave him a vast supply of the best
ammunition for his bear campaign.
To get back to myself. After I closed my trade in wheat and corn I went South in my
yacht. I cruised about in Florida waters, having a grand old time. The fishing was great.
Everything was lovely. I didn't have a care in the world and I wasn't looking for any.
One day I went ashore at Palm Beach. I met a lot of Wall Street friends and others. They
were all talking about the most picturesque cotton speculator of the day. A report from
New York had it that Percy Thomas had lost every cent. It wasn't a commercial
bankruptcy; merely the rumor of the world-famous operator's second Waterloo in the
cotton market.
I had always felt a great admiration for him. The first I ever heard of him was through
the newspapers at the time of the failure of the Stock Exchange house of Sheldon &
Thomas, when Thomas tried to corner cotton. Sheldon, who did not have the vision or
the courage of his partner, got cold feet on the very verge of success. At least, so the
Street said at the time. At all events, instead of making a killing they made one of the
most sensational failures in years. I forget how many millions. The firm was wound up
and Thomas went to work alone. He devoted himself exclusively to cotton and it was not
long before he was on his feet again. He paid off his creditors in full with interest debts
he was not legally obliged to discharge and withal had a million dollars left for himself.
His comeback in the cotton market was in its way as remarkable as Deacon S. V.
White's famous stock-market exploit of paying off one million dollars in one year.
Thomas' pluck and brains made me admire him immensely.
Everybody in Palm Beach was talking about the collapse of Thomas' deal in March
cotton. You know how the talk goes and grows; the amount of misinformation and
exaggeration and improvements that you hear. Why, I've seen a rumor about myself
grow so that the fellow who started it did not recognise it when it came back to him in
less than twenty-four hours, swollen with new and picturesque details.
The news of Percy Thomas' latest misadventure turned my mind from the fishing to the
cotton market. I got files of the trade papers and read them to get a line on conditions.
When I got back to New York I gave myself up to studying the market. Everybody was
bearish and everybody was selling July cotton. You know how people are. I suppose it is
the contagion of example that makes a man do something because everybody around
him is doing the same thing. Perhaps it is some phase or variety of the herd instinct. In
any case it was, in the opinion of hundreds of traders, the wise and proper thing to sell
July cotton and so safe too! You couldn't call that general selling reckless; the word is
too conservative. The traders simply saw one side to the market and a great big profit.
They certainly expected a collapse in prices.
I saw all this, of course, and it struck me that the chaps who were short didn't have a
terrible lot of time to cover in. The more I studied the situation the clearer I saw this,
until I finally decided to buy July cotton. I went to work and quickly bought one
hundred thousand bales. I experienced no trouble in getting it because it came from so
many sellers. It seemed to me that I could have offered a reward of one million dollars
for the capture, dead or alive, of a single trader who was not selling July cotton and
nobody would have claimed it.
I should say this was in the latter part of May. I kept buying more and they kept on
selling it to me until I had picked up all the floating contracts and I had one hundred and
twenty thousand bales. A couple of days after I had bought the last of it it began to go
up. Once it started the market was kind enough to keep on doing very well indeed -that
is, it went up from forty to fifty points a day.
One Saturday this was about ten days after I began operations the price began to creep
up. I did not know whether there was any more July cotton for sale. It was up to me to
find out, so I waited until the last ten minutes. At that time, I knew, it was usual for
those fellows to be short and if the market closed up for the day they would be safely
hooked. So I sent in four different orders to buy five thousand bales each, at the market,
at the same time. That ran the price up thirty points and the shorts were doing their best
to wriggle away. The market closed at the top. All I did, remember, was to buy that last
twenty thousand bales.
The next day was Sunday. But on Monday, Liverpool was due to open up twenty points
to be on a parity with the advance in New York. Instead, it came fifty points higher. That
meant that Liverpool had exceeded our advance by 100 per cent. I had nothing to do
with the rise in that market. This showed me that my deductions had been sound and that
I was trading along the line of least resistance. At the same time I was not losing sight of
the fact that I had a whopping big line to dispose of. A market may advance sharply or
rise gradually and yet not possess the power to absorb more than a certain amount of
selling.
Of course the Liverpool cables made our own market wild. But I noticed the higher it
went the scarcer July cotton seemed to be. I wasn't letting go any of mine. Altogether
that Monday was an exciting and not very cheerful day for the bears; but for all that, I
could detect no signs of an impending bear panic; no beginnings of a blind stampede to
cover. And I had one hundred and forty thousand bales for which I must find a market.
On Tuesday morning as I was walking to my office I met a friend at the entrance of the
building.
"That was quite a story in the World this morning," he said with a smile.
"What story?" I asked.
"What? Do you mean to tell me you haven't seen it?"
"I never see the World," I said. "What is the story?"
"Why, it's all about you. It says you've got July cotton cornered."
"I haven't seen it," I told him and left him. I don't know whether he believed me or not.
He probably thought it was highly inconsiderate of me not to tell him whether it was true
or not.
When I got to the office I sent out for a copy of the paper. Sure enough, there it was, on
the front page, in big headlines:
JULY COTTON CORNERED BY LARRY LIVINGSTON
Of course I knew at once that the article would play the dickens with the market. If I had
deliberately studied ways and means of disposing of my one hundred and forty thousand
bales to the best advantage I couldn't have hit upon a better plan. It would not have been
possible to find one. That article at that very moment was being read all over the country
either in the World or in other papers quoting it. It had been cabled to Europe. That was
plain from the Liverpool prices. That market was simply wild. No wonder, with such
news.
Of course I knew what New York would do, and what I ought to do. The market here
opened at ten o'clock. At ten minutes after ten I did not own any cotton. I let them have
every one of my one hundred and forty thousand bales. For most of my line I received
what proved to be the top prices of the day. The traders made the market for me. All I
really did was to see a heaven-sent opportunity to get rid of my cotton. I grasped it
because I couldn't help it. What else could I do?
The problem that I knew would take a great deal of hard thinking to solve was thus
solved for me by an accident. If the World had not published that article I never would
have been able to dispose of my line without sacrificing the greater portion of my paper
profits. Selling one hundred and forty thousand bales of July cotton without sending the
price down was a trick beyond my powers. But the World story turned it for me very
nicely.
Why the World published it I cannot tell you. I never knew. I suppose the writer was
tipped off by some friend in the cotton market and he thought he was printing a scoop. I
didn't see him or anybody from the World. I didn't know it was printed that morning
until after nine o'clock; and if it had not been for my friend calling my attention to it I
would not have known it then.
Without it I wouldn't have had a market big enough to unload in. That is one trouble
about trading on a large scale. You cannot sneak out as you can when you pike along.
You cannot always sell out when you wish or when you think it wise. You have to get
out when you can; when you have a market that will absorb your entire line. Failure to
grasp the opportunity to get out may cost you millions. You cannot hesitate. If you do
you are lost. Neither can you try stunts like running up the price on the bears by means
of competitive buying, for you may thereby reduce the absorbing capacity. And I want
to tell you that perceiving your opportunity is not as easy as it sounds. A man must be on
the lookout so alertly that when his chance sticks in its head at his door he must grab it.
Of course not everybody knew about my fortunate accident. In Wall Street, and, for that
matter, everywhere else, any accident that makes big money for a man is regarded with
suspicion. When the accident is unprofitable it is never considered an accident but the
logical outcome of your hoggish-ness or of the swelled head. But when there is a profit
they call it loot and talk about how well unscrupulousness fares, and how ill
conservatism and decency.
It was not only the evil-minded shorts smarting under punishment brought about by their
own recklessness who accused me of having deliberately planned the coup. Other people
thought the same thing.
One of the biggest men in cotton in the entire world met me a day or two later and said,
"That was certainly the slickest deal you ever put over, Livingston. I was wondering
how much you were going to lose when you came to market that line of yours. You
knew this market was not big enough to take more than fifty or sixty thousand bales
without selling off, and how you were going to work off the rest and not lose all your
paper profits was beginning to interest me. I didn't think of your scheme. It certainly was
slick."
"I had nothing to do with it," I assured him as earnestly as I could.
But all he did was to repeat: "Mighty slick, my boy. Mighty slick! Don't be so modest!"
It was after that deal that some of the papers referred to me as the Cotton King. But, as I
said, I really was not entitled to that crown. It is not necessary to tell you that there is not
enough money in the United States to buy the columns of the New York World or
enough personal pull to secure the publication of a story like that. It gave me an utterly
unearned reputation that time.
But I have not told this story to moralize on the crowns that are sometimes pressed down
upon the brows of undeserving traders or to emphasize the need of seizing the
opportunity, no matter when or how it comes. My object merely was to account for the
vast amount of newspaper notoriety that came to me as the result of my deal in July
cotton. If it hadn't been for the newspapers I never would have met that remarkable man,
Percy Thomas.



Chapter XII
Not long after I closed my July cotton deal more successfully than I had expected I
received by mail a request for an interview. The letter was signed by Percy Thomas. Of
course I immediately answered that I'd be glad to see him at my office at any time he
cared to call. The next day he came.
I had long admired him. His name was a household word wherever men took an interest
in growing or buying or selling cotton. In Europe as well as all over this country people
quoted Percy Thomas' opinions to me. I remember once at a Swiss resort talking to a
Cairo banker who was interested in cotton growing in Egypt in association with the late
Sir Ernest Cassel. When he heard I was from New York he immediately asked me about
Percy Thomas, whose market reports he received and read with unfailing regularity.
Thomas, I always thought, went about his business scientifically. He was a true
speculator, a thinker with the vision of a dreamer and the courage of a fighting man an
unusually well-informed man, who knew both the theory and the practice of trading in
cotton. He loved to hear and to express ideas and theories and abstractions, and at the
same time there was mighty little about the practical side of the cotton market or the
psychology of cotton traders that he did not know, for he had been trading for years and
had made and lost vast sums.
After the failure of his old Stock Exchange firm of Sheldon & Thomas he went it alone.
Inside of two years he came back, almost spectacularly. I remember reading in the Sun
that the first thing he did when he got on his feet financially was to pay off his old
creditors in full, and the next was to hire an expert to study and determine for him how
he had best invest a million dollars. This expert examined the properties and analysed
the reports of several companies and then recommended the purchase of Delaware &
Hudson stock.
Well, after having failed for millions and having come back with more millions, Thomas
was cleaned out as the result of his deal in March cotton. There wasn't much time wasted
after he came to see me. He proposed that we form a working alliance. Whatever
information he got he would immediately turn over to me before passing it on to the
public. My part would be to do the actual trading, for which he said I had a special
genius and he hadn't.
That did not appeal to me for a number of reasons. I told him frankly that I did not think
I could run in double harness and wasn't keen about trying to learn. But he insisted that
it would be an ideal combination until I said flatly that I did not want to have anything to
do with influencing other people to trade.
"If I fool myself," I told him, "I alone suffer and I pay the bill at once. There are no
drawn-out payments or unexpected annoyances. I play a lone hand by choice and also
because it is the wisest and cheapest way to trade. I get my pleasure out of matching my
brains against the brains of other traders men whom I have never seen and never talked
to and never advised to buy or sell and never expect to meet or know. When I make
money I make it backing my own opinions. I don't sell them or capitalise them. If I made
money in any other way I would imagine I had not earned it. Your proposition does not
interest me because I am interested in the game only as I play it for myself and in my
own way."
He said he was sorry I felt the way I did, and tried to convince me that I was wrong in
rejecting his plan. But I stuck to my views. The rest was a pleasant talk. I told him I
knew he would "come back" and that I would consider it a privilege if he would allow
me to be of financial assistance to him. But he said he could not accept any loans from
me. Then he asked me about my July deal and I told him all about it; how I had gone
into it and how much cotton I bought and the price and other details. We chatted a little
more and then he went away.
When I said to you some time ago that a speculator has a host of enemies, many of
whom successfully bore from within, I had in mind my many mistakes. I have learned
that a man may possess an original mind and a lifelong habit of independent thinking
and withal be vulnerable to attacks by a persuasive personality. I am fairly immune from
the commoner speculative ailments, such as greed and fear and hope. But being an
ordinary man I find I can err with great ease.
I ought to have been on my guard at this particular time because not long before that I
had had an experience that proved how easily a man may be talked into doing something
against his judgment and even against his wishes. It happened in Harding's office. I had
a sort of private office a room that they let me occupy by myself and nobody was
supposed to get to me during market hours without my consent. I didn't wish to be
bothered and, as I was trading on a very large scale and my account was fairly
profitable, I was pretty well guarded.
One day just after the market closed I heard somebody say, "Good afternoon, Mr.
Livingston."
I turned and saw an utter stranger a chap of about thirty or thirty-five. I could not
understand how he'd got in, but there he was. I concluded his business with me had
passed him. But I didn't say anything. I just looked at him and pretty soon he said, "I
came to see you about that Walter Scott," and he was off.
He was a book agent. Now, he was not particularly pleasing of manner or skillful of
speech. Neither was he especially attractive to look at. But he certainly had personality.
He talked and I thought I listened. But I do not know what he said. I don't think I ever
knew, not even at the time. When he finished his monologue he handed me first his
fountain pen and then a blank form, which I signed. It was a contract to take a set of
Scott's works for five hundred dollars.
The moment I signed I came to. But he had the contract safe in his pocket. I did not want
the books. I had no place for them. They weren't of any use whatever to me. I had
nobody to give them to. Yet I had agreed to buy them for five hundred dollars.
I am so accustomed to losing money that I never think first of that phase of my mistakes.
It is always the play itself, the reason why. In the first place I wish to know my own
limitations and habits of thought. Another reason is that I do not wish to make the same
mistake a second time. A man can excuse his mistakes only by capitalising them to his
subsequent profit.
Well, having made a five-hundred dollar mistake but not yet having localised the
trouble, I just looked at the fellow to size him up as a first step. I'll be hanged if he didn't
actually smile at me an understanding little smile! He seemed to read my thoughts. I
somehow knew that I did not have to explain anything to him; he knew it without my
telling him. So I skipped the explanations and the preliminaries and asked him, "How
much commission will you get on that five hundred dollar order?"
He promptly shook his head and said, "I can't do it! Sorry!"
"How much do you get?" I persisted.
"A third. But I can't do it!" he said.
"A third of five hundred dollars is one hundred and sixty-six dollars and sixty-six cents.
I'll give you two hundred dollars cash if you give me back that signed contract" And to
prove it I took the money out of my pocket.
"I told you I couldn't do it," he said.
"Do all your customers make the same offer to you?" I asked.
"No," he answered.
"Then why were you so sure that I was going to make it?"
"It is what your type of sport would do. You are a first-class loser and that makes you a
first-class business man. I am much obliged to you, but I can't do it."
"Now tell me why you do not wish to make more than your commission?"
"It isn't that, exactly," he said. "I am not working just for the commission."
"What are you working for then?"
"For the commission and the record," he answered.
"What record?"
"Mine."
"What are you driving at?"
"Do you work for money alone?" he asked me.
"Yes," I said.
"No." And he shook his head. "No, you don't. You wouldn't get enough fun out of it.
You certainly do not work merely to add a few more dollars to your bank account and
you are not in Wall Street because you like easy money. You get your fun some other
way. Well, same here."
I did not argue but asked him, "And how do you get your fun?"
"Well," he confessed, "we've all got a weak spot."
"And what's yours?"
"Vanity," he said.
"Well," I told him, "you succeeded in getting me to sign on. Now I want to sign off, and
I am paying you two hundred dollars for ten minutes' work. Isn't that enough for your
pride?"
"No," he answered. "You see, all the rest of the bunch have been working Wall Street
for months and failed to make expenses. They said it was the fault of the goods and the
territory. So the office sent for me to prove that the fault was with their salesmanship
and not with the books or the place. They were working on a 25 per cent commission. I
was in Cleveland, where I sold eighty-two sets in two weeks. I am here to sell a certain
number of sets not only to people who did not buy from the other agents but to people
they couldn't even get to see. That's why they give me 33-1/3 percent."
"I can't quite figure out how you sold me that set."
"Why," he said consolingly, "I sold J. P. Morgan a set."
"No, you didn't," I said. He wasn't angry. He simply said, "Honest, I did!"
"A set of Walter Scott to J. P. Morgan, who not only has some fine editions but probably
the original manuscripts of some of the novels as well?"
"Well, here's his John Hancock." And he promptly flashed on me a contract signed by J.
P. Morgan himself. It might not have been Mr. Morgan's signature, but it did not occur
to me to doubt it at the time.
Didn't he have mine in his pocket? All I felt was curiosity. So I asked him, "How did
you get past the librarian?"
"I didn't see any librarian. I saw the Old Man himself. In his office."
"That's too much!" I said. Everybody knew that it was much harder to get into Mr.
Morgan's private office empty handed than into the White House with a parcel that
ticked like an alarm clock.
But he declared, "I did."
"But how did you get into his office?"
"How did I get into yours?" he retorted.
"I don't know. You tell me," I said.
"Well, the way I got into Morgan's office and the way I got into yours are the same. I
just talked to the fellow at the door whose business it was not to let me in. And the way
I got Morgan to sign was the same way I got you to sign. You weren't signing a contract
for a set of books. You just took the fountain pen I gave you and did what I asked you to
do with it. No difference. Same as you."
"And is that really Morgan's signature?" I asked him, about three minutes late with my
skepticism.
"Sure! He learned how to write his name when he was a boy."
"And that's all there's to it?"
"That's all," he answered. "I know exactly what I am doing. That's all the secret there is.
I am much obliged to you. Good day, Mr. Livingston." And he started to go out.
"Hold on," I said. "I'm bound to have you make an even two hundred dollars out of me."
And I handed him thirty-five dollars.
He shook his head. Then: "No," he said. "I can't do that. But I can do this!" And he took
the contract from his pocket, tore it in two and gave me the pieces.
I counted two hundred dollars and held the money before him, but he again shook his
head.
"Isn't that what you meant?" I said.
"No."
"Then, why did you tear up the contract?"
"Because you did not whine, but took it as I would have taken it myself had I been in
your place."
"But I offered you the two hundred dollars of my own accord," I said.
"I know; but money isn't everything."
Something in his voice made me say, "You're right; it isn't And now what do you really
want me to do for
you?"
"You're quick, aren't you?" he said. "Do you really want to do something for me?"
"Yes," I told him, "I do. But whether I will or not depends what it is you have in mind."
"Take me with you into Mr. Ed Harding's office and tell him to let me talk to him three
minutes by the clock. Then leave me alone with him."
I shook my head and said, "He is a good friend of mine."
"He's fifty years old and a stock broker," said the book agent That was perfectly true, so
I took him into Ed's office. I did not hear anything more from or about that book agent.
But one evening some weeks later when I was going uptown I ran across him in a Sixth
Avenue L train. He raised his hat very politely and I nodded back. He came over and
asked me, "How do you do, Mr. Livingston? And how is Mr. Harding?"
"He's well. Why do you ask?" I felt he was holding back a story.
"I sold him two thousand dollars' worth of books that day you took me in to see him."
"He never said a word to me about it," I said,
"No; that kind doesn't talk about it."
"What kind doesn't talk?"
"The kind that never makes mistakes on account of its being bad business to make them.
That kind always knows what he wants and nobody can tell him different. That is the
kind that's educating my children and keeps my wife in good humor. You did me a good
turn, Mr. Livingston. I expected it when I gave up the two hundred dollars you were so
anxious to present to me."
"And if Mr. Harding hadn't given you an order?"
"Oh, but I knew he would. I had found out what kind of man he was. He was a cinch."
"Yes. But if he hadn't bought any books?" I persisted.
"I'd have come back to you and sold you something. Good day, Mr. Livingston. I am
going to see the mayor." And he got up as we pulled up at Park Place.
"I hope you sell him ten sets," I said. His Honor was a Tammany man.
"I'm a Republican, too," he said, and went out, not hastily, but leisurely, confident that
the train would wait. And it did.
I have told you this story in such detail because it concerned a remarkable man who
made me buy what I did not wish to buy. He was the first man who did that to me. There
never should have been a second, but there was. You can never bank on there being but
one remarkable salesman in the world or on complete immunization from the influence
of personality.
When Percy Thomas left my office, after I had pleasantly but definitely declined to enter
into a working alliance with him, I would have sworn that our business paths would
never cross. I was not sure I'd ever even see him again. But on the very next day he
wrote me a letter thanking me for my offers of help and inviting me to come and see
him. I answered that I would. He wrote again. I called.
I got to see a great deal of him. It was always a pleasure for me to listen to him, he knew
so much and he expressed his knowledge so interestingly. I think he is the most
magnetic man I ever met.
We talked of many things, for he is a widely read man with an amazing grasp of many
subjects and a remarkable gift for interesting generalization. The wisdom of his speech
is impressive; and as for plausibility, he hasn't an equal. I have heard many people
accuse Percy Thomas of many things, including insincerity, but I sometimes wonder if
his remarkable plausibility does not come from the fact that he first convinces himself so
thoroughly as to acquire thereby a greatly increased power to convince others.
Of course we talked about market matters at great length. I was not bullish on cotton, but
he was. I could not see the bull side at all, but he did. He brought up so many facts and
figures that I ought to have been overwhelmed, but I wasn't. I couldn't disprove them
because I could not deny their authenticity, but they did not shake my belief in what I
read for myself. But he kept at it until I no longer felt sure of my own information as
gathered from the trade papers and the dailies. That meant I couldn't see the market with
my own eyes. A man cannot be convinced against his own convictions, but he can be
talked into a state of uncertainty and indecision, which is even worse, for that means that
he cannot trade with confidence and comfort.
I cannot say that I got all mixed up, exactly, but I lost my poise; or rather, I ceased to do
my own thinking. I cannot give you in detail the various steps by which I reached the
state of mind that was to prove so costly to me. I think it was his assurances of the
accuracy of his figures, which were exclusively his, and the undependability of mine,
which were not exclusively mine, but public property. He harped on the utter reliability,
as proved time and again, of all his ten thousand correspondents throughout the South.
In the end I came to read conditions as he himself read them because we were both
reading from the same page of the same book, held by him before my eyes. He has a
logical mind. Once I accepted his facts it was a cinch that my own conclusions, derived
from his facts, would agree with his own.
When he began his talks with me about the cotton situation I not only was bearish but I
was short of the market. Gradually, as I began to accept his facts and figures, I began to
fear I had been basing my previous position on misinformation. Of course I could not
feel that way and not cover. And once I had covered because Thomas made me think I
was wrong, I simply had to go long. It is the way my mind works. You know, I have
done nothing in my life but trade in stocks and commodities. I naturally think that if it is
wrong to be bearish it must be right to be a bull. And if it is right to be a bull it is
imperative to buy. As my old Palm Beach friend said Pat Hearne used to say, "You can't
tell till you bet!" I must prove whether I am right on the market or not; and the proofs
are to be read only in my brokers' statements at the end of the month.
I started in to buy cotton and in a jiffy I had my usual line,' about sixty thousand bales. It
was the most asinine play of my career. Instead of standing or falling by my own
observation and deductions I was merely playing another man's game. It was eminently
fitting that my silly plays should not end with that. I not only bought when I had no
business to be bullish but I didn't accumulate my line in accordance with the promptings
of experience. I wasn't trading right. Having listened, I was lost.
The market was not going my way. I am never afraid or impatient when I am sure of my
position. But the market didn't act the way it should have acted had Thomas been right.
Having taken the first wrong step I took the second and the third, and of course it
muddled me all up. I allowed myself to be persuaded not only into not taking my loss
but into holding up the market. That is a style of play foreign to my nature and contrary
to my trading principles and theories. Even as a boy in the bucket shops I had known
better. But I was not myself. I was another man a Thomas-ized person.
I not only was long of cotton but I was carrying a heavy line of wheat. That was doing
famously and showed me a handsome profit. My fool efforts to bolster up cotton had
increased my line to about one hundred and fifty thousand bales. I may tell you that
about this time I was not feeling very well. " I don't say this to furnish an excuse for my
blunders, but merely to state a pertinent fact. I remember I went to Bayshore for a rest.
While there I did some thinking. It seemed to me that my speculative commitments were
overlarge. I am not timid as a rule, but I got to feeling nervous and that made me decide
to lighten my load. To do this I must clean up either tht cotton or the wheat.
It seems incredible that knowing the game as well as I did and with an experience of
twelve or fourteen years of speculating in stocks and commodities I did precisely the
wrong thing. The cotton showed me a loss and I kept it. The wheat showed me a profit
and I sold it out. It was an utterly foolish play, but all I can say in extenuation is that it
wasn't really my deal, but Thomas'. Of all speculative blunders there are few greater
than trying to average a losing game. My cotton deal proved it to the hilt a little later.
Always sell what shows you a loss and keep what shows you a profit. That was so
obviously the wise thing to do and was so well known to me that even now I marvel at
myself for doing the reverse.
And so I sold my wheat, deliberately cut short my profit in it. After I got out of it the
price went up twenty cents a bushel without stopping. If I had kept it I might have taken
a profit of about eight million dollars. And having decided to keep on with the losing
proposition I bought more cotton!
I remember very clearly how every day I would buy cotton, more cotton. And why do
you think I bought it? To keep the price from going down! If that isn't a supersucker
play, what is? I simply kept on putting up more and more money more money to lose
eventually. My brokers and my intimate friends could not understand it; and they don't
to this day. Of course if the deal had turned out differently I would have been a wonder.
More than once I was warned against placing too much reliance on Percy Thomas'
brilliant analyses. To this I paid no heed, but kept on buying cotton to keep it from going
down. I was even buying it in Liverpool. I accumulated four hundred and forty thousand
bales before I realised what I was doing. And then it was too late. So I sold out my line.
I lost nearly all that I had made out of all my other deals in stocks and commodities. I
was not completely cleaned out, but I had left fewer hundreds of thousands than I had
millions before I met my brilliant friend Percy Thomas. For me of all men to violate all
the laws that experience had taught me to observe in order to prosper was more than
asinine.
To learn that a man can make foolish plays for no reason whatever was a valuable
lesson. It cost me millions to learn that another dangerous enemy to a trader is his
susceptibility to the urgings of a magnetic personality when plausibly expressed by a
brilliant mind. It has always seemed to me, however, that I might have learned my
lesson quite as well if the cost had been only one million. But Fate does not always let
you fix the tuition fee. She delivers the educational wallop and presents her own bill,
knowing you have to pay it, no matter what the amount may be. Having learned what
folly I was capable of I closed that particular incident. Percy Thomas went out of my
life.
There I was, with more than nine-tenths of my stake, as Jim Fisk used to say, gone
where the woodbine twineth up the spout. I had been a millionaire rather less than a
year. My millions I had made by using brains, helped by luck. I had lost them by
reversing the process. I sold my two yachts and was decidedly less extravagant in my
manner of living.
But that one blow wasn't enough. Luck was against me. I ran up first against illness and
then against the urgent need of two hundred thousand dollars in cash. A few months
before that sum would have been nothing at all; but now it meant almost the entire
remnant of my fleet-winged fortune. I had to supply the money and the question was:
Where could I get it? I didn't want to take it out of the balance I kept at my brokers'
because if I did I wouldn't have much of a margin left for my own trading; and I needed
trading facilities more than ever if I was to win back my millions quickly. There was
only one alternative that I could see, and that was to take it out of the stock market!
Just think of it! If you know much about the average customer of the average
commission house you will agree with me that the hope of making the stock market pay
your bill is one of the most prolific sources of loss in Wall Street. You will chip out all
you have if you adhere to your determination.
Why, in Harding's office one winter a little bunch of high flyers spent thirty or forty
thousand dollars for an overcoat and not one of them lived to wear it. It so happened that
a prominent floor trader who since has become world-famous as one of the dollar-a-year
men came down to the Exchange wearing a fur overcoat lined with sea otter. In those
days, before furs went up sky high, that coat was valued at only ten thousand dollars.
Well, one of the chaps in Harding's office, Bob Keown, decided to get a coat lined with
Russian sable. He priced one uptown. The cost was about the same, ten thousand dollars.
"That's the devil of a lot of money," objected one of the fellows.
"Oh, fair! Fair!" admitted Bob Keown amiably. "About a week's wages unless you guys
promise to present it to me as a slight but sincere token of the esteem in which you hold
the nicest man in the office. Do I hear the presentation speech? No? Very well. I shall let
the stock market buy it for me!"
"Why do you want a sable coat?" asked Ed Harding.
"It would look particularly well on a man of my inches," replied Bob, drawing himself
up.
"And how did you say you were going to pay for it?" asked Jim Murphy, who was the
star tip-chaser of the office.
"By a judicious investment of a temporary character, James. That's how," answered Bob,
who knew that Murphy merely wanted a tip.
Sure enough, Jimmy asked, "What stock are you going to buy?"
"Wrong as usual, friend. This is no time to buy anything. I propose to sell five thousand
Steel. It ought to go down ten points at the least. I'll just take two and a half points net.
That is conservative, isn't it?"
"What do you hear about it?" asked Murphy eagerly. He was a tall thin man with black
hair and a hungry look, due to his never going out to lunch for fear of missing something
on the tape.
"I hear that coat's the most becoming I ever planned to get." He turned to Harding and
said, "Ed, sell five thousand U. S. Steel common at the market. Today darling!"
He was a plunger, Bob was, and liked to indulge in humorous talk. It was his way of
letting the world know that he had an iron nerve. He sold five thousand Steel, and the
stock promptly went up. Not being half as big an ass as he seemed when he talked, Bob
stopped his loss at one and a half points and confided to the office that the New York
climate was too benign for fur coats. They were unhealthy and ostentatious. The rest of
the fellows jeered. But it was not long before one of them bought some Union Pacific to
pay for the coat. He lost eighteen hundred dollars and said sables were all right for the
outside of a woman's wrap, but not for the inside of a garment intended to be worn by a
modest and intelligent man.
After that, one after another of the fellows tried to coax the market to pay for that coat.
One day I said I would buy it to keep the office from going broke. But they all said that
it wasn't a sporting thing to do; that if I wanted the coat for myself I ought to let the
market give it to me. But Ed Harding strongly approved of my intention and that same
afternoon I went to the furrier's to buy it. I found out that a man from Chicago had
bought it the week before.
That was only one case. There isn't a man in Wall Street who has not lost money trying
to make the market pay for an automobile or a bracelet or a motor boat or a painting. I
could build a huge hospital with the birthday presents that the tight-fisted stock market
has refused to pay for. In fact, of all hoodoos in Wall Street I think the resolve to induce
the stock market to act as a fairy godmother is the busiest and most persistent.
Like all well-authenticated hoodoos this has its reason for being. What does a man do
when he sets out to make the stock market pay for a sudden need? Why, he merely
hopes. He gambles. He therefore runs much greater risks than he would if he were
speculating intelligently, in accordance with opinions or beliefs logically arrived at after
a dispassionate study of underlying conditions. To begin with, he is after an immediate
profit. He cannot afford to wait. The market must be nice to him at once if at all. He
flatters himself that he is not asking more than to place an even-money bet. Because he
is prepared to run quick say, stop his loss at two points when all he hopes to make is two
points he hugs the fallacy that he is merely taking a fifty-fifty chance. Why, I've known
men to lose thousands of dollars on such trades, particularly on purchases made at the
height of a bull market just before a moderate reaction. It certainly is no way to trade.
Well, that crowning folly of my career as a stock operator was the last straw. It beat me.
I lost what little my cotton deal had left me. It did even more harm, for I kept on trading
and losing. I persisted in thinking that the stock market must perforce make money for
me in the end. But the only end in sight was the end of my resources. I went into debt,
not only to my principal brokers but to other houses that accepted business from me
without my putting up an adequate margin. I not only got in debt but I stayed in debt
from then on.


Chapter XIII
There I was, once more broke, which was bad, and dead wrong in my trading, which
was a sight worse. I was sick, nervous, upset and unable to reason calmly. That is, I was
in the frame of mind in which no speculator should be when he is trading. Everything
went wrong with me. Indeed, I began to think that I could not recover my departed sense
of proportion. Having grown accustomed to swinging a big line say, more than a
hundred thousand shares of stock I feared I would not show good judgment trading in a
small way. It scarcely seemed worth while being right when all you carried was a
hundred shares of stock. After the habit of taking a big profit on a big line I wasn't sure I
would know when to take my profit on a small line. I can't describe to you how
weaponless I felt.
Broke again and incapable of assuming the offensive vigorously. In debt and wrong!
After all those long years of successes, tempered by mistakes that really served to pave
the way for greater successes, I was now worse off than when I began in the bucket
shops. I had learned a great deal about the game of stock speculation, but I had not
learned quite so much about the play of human weaknesses. There is no mind so
machinelike that you can depend upon it to function with equal efficiency at all times. I
now learned that I could not trust myself to remain equally unaffected by men and
misfortunes at all times.
Money losses have never worried me in the slightest. But other troubles could and did. I
studied my disaster in detail and of course found no difficulty in seeing just where I had
been silly. I spotted the exact time and place. A man must know himself thoroughly if he
is going to make a good job out of trading in the speculative markets. To know what I
was capable of in the line of folly was a long educational step. I sometimes think that no
price is too high for a speculator to pay to learn that which will keep him from getting
the swelled head. A great many smashes by brilliant men can be traced directly to the
swelled head an expensive disease everywhere to everybody, but particularly in Wall
Street to a speculator.
I was not happy in New York, feeling the way I did. I didn't want to trade, because I
wasn't in good trading trim. I decided to go away and seek a stake elsewhere. The
change of scene could help me to find myself again, I thought. So once more I left New
York, beaten by the game of speculation. I was worse than broke, since I owed over one
hundred thousand dollars spread among various brokers.
I went to Chicago and there found a stake. It was not a very substantial stake, but that
merely meant that I would need a little more time to win back my fortune. A house that I
once had done business with had faith in my ability as a trader and they were willing to
prove it by allowing me to trade in their office in a small way.
I began very conservatively. I don't know how I might have fared had I stayed there. But
one of the most remarkable experiences in my career cut short my stay in Chicago It is
an almost incredible story.
One day I got a telegram from Lucius Tucker. I had known him when he was the office
manager of a Stock Exchange firm that I had at times given some business to, but I had
lost track of him. The telegram read:
Come to New York at once. L. TUCKER.
I knew that he knew from mutual friends how I was fixed and therefore it was certain he
had something up his sleeve. At the same time I had no money to throw away on an
unnecessary trip to New York; so instead of doing what he asked me to do I got him on
the long distance.
"I got your telegram," I said. "What does it mean?"
"It means that a big banker in New York wants to see you/' he answered.
"Who is it?" I asked. I couldn't imagine who it could be.
"I'll tell you when you get to New York. No use otherwise."
"You say he wants to see me?"
"He does."
"What about?"
"He'll tell you that in person if you give him a chance," said Lucius.
"Can't you write me?"
"No."
"Then tell me more plainly," I said.
"I don't want to."
"Look here, Lucius," I said, "just tell me this much: Is this a fool trip?"
"Certainly not. It will be to your advantage to come."
"Can't you give me an inkling?"
"No," he said. "It wouldn't be fair to him. And besides, I don't know just how much he
wants to do for
you. But take my advice: Come, and come quick."
"Are you sure it is I that he wishes to see?"
"Nobody else but you will do. Better come, I tell you. Telegraph me what train you take
and I'll meet you at the station."
"Very well," I said, and hung up.
I didn't like quite so much mystery, but I knew that Lucius was friendly and that he must
have a good reason for talking the way he did. I wasn't faring so sumptuously in Chicago
that it would break my heart to leave it. At the rate I was trading it would be a long time
before I could get together enough money to operate on the old scale.
I came back to New York, not knowing what would happen. Indeed, more than once
during the trip I feared nothing at all would happen and that I'd be out my railroad fare
and my time. I could not guess that I was about to have the most curious experience of
my entire life.
Lucius met me at the station and did not waste any time in telling me that he had sent for
me at the urgent request of Mr. Daniel Williamson, of the well-known Stock Exchange
house of Williamson & Brown. Mr. Williamson told Lucius to tell me that he had a
business proposition to make to me that he was sure I would accept since it would be
very profitable for me. Lucius swore he didn't know what the proposition was. The
character of the firm was a guaranty that nothing improper would be demanded of me.
Dan Williamson was the senior member of the firm, which was founded by Egbert
Williamson way back in the '70s. There was no Brown and hadn't been one in the firm
for years. The house had been very prominent in Dan's father's time and Dan had
inherited a considerable fortune and didn't go after much outside business. They had one
customer who was worth a hundred average customers and that was Alvin Marquand,
Williamson's brother-in-law, who in addition to being a director in a dozen banks and
trust companies was the president of the great Chesapeake and Atlantic Railroad system.
He was the most picturesque personality in the railroad world after James J. Hill, and
was the spokesman and dominant member of the powerful banking coterie known as the
Fort Dawson gang. He was worth from fifty million to five hundred million dollars, the
estimate depending upon the state of the speaker's liver. When he died they found out
that he was worth two hundred and fifty million dollars, all made in Wall Street. So you
see he was some customer.
Lucius told me he had just accepted a position with Williamson & Brown one that was
made for him. He was supposed to be a sort of circulating general business getter. The
firm was after a general commission business and Lucius had induced Mr. Williamson
to open a couple of branch offices, one in one of the big hotels uptown and the other in
Chicago. I rather gathered that I was going to be offered a position in the latter place,
possibly as office manager, which was something I would not accept. I didn't jump on
Lucius because I thought I'd better wait until the offer was made before I refused it.
Lucius took me into Mr. Williamson's private office, introduced me to his chief and left
the room in a hurry, as though he wished to avoid being called as witness in a case in
which he knew both parties. I prepared to listen and then to say no.
Mr. Williamson was very pleasant. He was a thorough gentleman, with polished
manners and a kindly smile. I could see that he made friends easily and kept them. Why
not? He was healthy and therefore good-humored. He had slathers of money and
therefore could not be suspected of sordid motives. These things, together with his
education and social training, made it easy for him to be not only polite but friendly, and
not only friendly but helpful.
I said nothing. I had nothing to say and, besides, I always let the other man have his say
in full before I do any talking. Somebody told me that the late James Stillman, president
of the National City Bank who, by the way, was an intimate friend of Williamson's made
it his practice to listen in silence, with an impassive face, to anybody who brought a
proposition to him. After the man got through Mr. Stillman continued to look at him, as
though the man had not finished. So the man, feeling urged to say something more, did
so. Simply by looking and listening Stillman often made the man offer terms much more
advantageous to the bank than he had meant to offer when he began to speak.
I don't keep silent just to induce people to offer a better bargain, but because I like to
know all the facts of the case. By letting a man have his say in full you are able to decide
at once. It is a great time-saver. It averts debates and prolonged discussions that get
nowhere. Nearly every business proposition that is brought to me can be settled, as far as
my participation in it is concerned, by my saying yes or no. But I cannot say yes or no
right off unless I have the complete proposition before me.
Dan Williamson did the talking and I did the listening. He told me he had heard a great
deal about my operations in the stock market and how he regretted that I had gone
outside of my bailiwick and come a cropper in cotton. Still it was to my bad luck that he
owed the pleasure of that interview with me. He thought my forte was the stock market,
that I was born for it and that I should not stray from it.
"And that is the reason, Mr. Livingston," he concluded pleasantly, "why we wish to do
business with you."
"Do business how?" I asked him.
"Be your brokers," he said. "My firm would like to do your stock business."
"I'd like to give it to you," I said, "but I can't."
"Why not?" he asked.
"I haven't any money," I answered.
"That part is all right," he said with a friendly smile. "I'll furnish it." He took out a
pocket check book, wrote out a check for twenty-five thousand dollars to my order, and
gave it to me.
"What's this for?" I asked.
"For you to deposit in your own bank. You will draw your own checks. I want you to do
your trading in our office. I don't care whether you win or lose. If that money goes 1 will
give you another personal check. So you don't have to be so very careful with this one.
See?"
I knew that the firm was too rich and prosperous to need anybody's business, much less
to give a fellow the money to put up as margin. And then he was so nice about it!
Instead of giving me a credit with the house he gave me the actual cash, so that he alone
knew where it came from, the only string being that if I traded I should do so through his
firm. And then the promise that there would be more if that went! Still, there must be a
reason.
"What's the idea?" I asked him.
"The idea is simply that we want to have a customer in this office who is known as a big
active trader. Everybody knows that you swing a big line on the short side, which is
what I particularly like about you. You are known as a plunger."
"I still don't get it," I said.
"I'll be frank with you, Mr. Livingston. We have two or three very wealthy customers
who buy and sell stocks in a big way. I don't want the Street to suspect them of selling
long stock every time we sell ten or twenty thousand shares of any stock. If the Street
knows that you are trading in our office it will not know whether it is your short selling
or the other customers' long stock that is coming on the market."
I understood at once. He wanted to cover up his brother-in-law's operations with my
reputation as a plunger! It so happened that I had made my biggest killing on the bear
side a year and a half before, and, of course, the Street gossips and the stupid rumor
mongers had acquired the habit of blaming me for every decline in prices. To this day
when the market is very weak they say I am raiding it.
I didn't have to reflect. I saw at a glance that Dan Williamson was offering me a chance
to come back and come back quickly. I took the check, banked it, opened an account
with his firm and began trading. It was a good active market, broad enough for a man
not to have to stick to one or two specialties. I had begun to fear, as I told you, that I had
lost the knack of hitting it right. But it seems I hadn't. In three weeks' time I had made a
profit of one hundred and twelve thousand dollars out of the twenty-five thousand that
Dan Williamson lent me.
I went to him and said, "I've come to pay you back that twenty-five thousand dollars."
"No, no!" he said and waved me away exactly as if I had offered him a castor-oil
cocktail. "No, no, my boy. Wait until your account amounts to something. Don't think
about it yet. You've only got chicken feed there."
There is where I made the mistake that I have regretted more than any other I ever made
in my Wall Street career. It was responsible for long and dreary years of suffering. I
should have insisted on his taking the money. I was on my way to a bigger fortune than I
had lost and walking pretty fast. For three weeks my average profit was 150 per cent per
week. From then on my trading would be on a steadily increasing scale. But instead of
freeing myself from all obligation I let him have his way and did not compel him to
accept the twenty-five thousand dollars. Of course, since he didn't draw out the twentyfive
thousand dollars he had advanced me I felt I could not very well draw out my profit.
I was very grateful to him, but I am so constituted that I don't like to owe money or
favours. I can pay the money back with money, but the favours and kindnesses I must
pay back in kind and you are apt to find these moral obligations mighty high priced at
times. Moreover there is no statute of limitations.
I left the money undisturbed and resumed my trading. I was getting on very nicely. I was
recovering my poise and I was sure it would not be very long before I should get back
into my 1907 stride. Once I did that, all I'd ask for would be for the market to hold out a
little while and I'd more than make up my losses. But making or not making the money
was not bothering me much. What made me happy was that I was losing the habit of
being wrong, of not being myself. It had played havoc with me for months but I had
learned my lesson.
Just about that time I turned bear and I began to sell short several railroad stocks.
Among them was Chesapeake & Atlantic. I think I put out a short line in it; about eight
thousand shares.
One morning when I got downtown Dan Williamson called me into his private office
before the market opened and said to me: "Larry, don't do anything in Chesapeake &
Atlantic just now. That was a bad play of yours, selling eight thousand short. I covered it
for you this morning in London and went long."
I was sure Chesapeake & Atlantic was going down. The tape told it to me quite plainly;
and besides I was bearish on the whole market, not violently or insanely bearish, but
enough to feel comfortable with a moderate short line out. I said to Williamson, "What
did you do that for? I am bearish on the whole market and they are all going lower."
But he just shook his head and said, "I did it because I happen to know something about
Chesapeake & Atlantic that you couldn't know. My advice to you is not to sell that stock
short until I tell you it is safe to do so."
What could I do? That wasn't an asinine tip. It was advice that came from the brother-inlaw
of the chairman of the board of directors. Dan was not only Alvin Marquand's
closest friend but he had been kind and generous to me. He had shown his faith in me
and confidence in my word. I couldn't do less than to thank him. And so my feelings
again won over my judgment and I gave in. To subordinate my judgment to his desires
was the undoing of me. Gratitude is something a decent man can't help feeling, but it is
for a fellow to keep it from completely tying him up. The first thing I knew I not only
had lost all my profit but I owed the firm one hundred and fifty thousand dollars besides.
I felt pretty badly about it, but Dan told me not to worry.
"I'll get you out of this hole," he promised. "I know I will. But I can only do it if you let
me. You will have to stop doing business on your own hook. I can't be working for you
and then have you completely undo all my work in your behalf. Just you lay off the
market and give me a chance to make some money for you. Won't you, Larry?"
Again I ask you: What could I do? I thought of his kindliness and I could not do
anything that might be construed as lacking in appreciation. I had grown to like him. He
was very pleasant and friendly. I remember that all I got from him was encouragement.
He kept on assuring me that everything would come out O.K. One day, perhaps six
months later, he came to me with a pleased smile and gave me some credit slips.
"I told you I would puil you out of that hole," he said, "and I have." And then I
discovered that not only had he wiped out the debt entirely but I had a small credit
balance besides.
I think I could have run that up without much trouble, for the market was right, but he
said to me, "I have bought you ten thousand shares of Southern Atlantic." That was
another road controlled by his brother-in-law, Alvin Marquand, who also ruled the
market destinies of the stock.
When a man does for you what Dan Williamson did for me you can't say anything but
"Thank you" no matter what your market views may be. You may be sure you're right,
but as Pat Hearne used to say: "You can't tell till you bet!" and Dan Williamson had bet
for me with his money.
Well, Southern Atlantic went down and stayed down and I lost, I forget how much, on
my ten thousand shares before Dan sold me out. I owed him more than ever. But you
never saw a nicer or less importunate creditor in your life. Never a whimper from him.
Instead, encouraging words and admonitions not to worry about it. In the end the loss
was made up for me in the same generous but mysterious way.
He gave no details whatever. They were all numbered accounts. Dan Williamson would
just say to me, "We made up your Southern Atlantic loss with profits on this other deal,"
and he'd tell me how he had sold seventy-five hundred shares of some other stock and
made a nice thing out of it. I can truthfully say that I never knew a blessed thing about
those trades of mine until I was told that the indebtedness was wiped out.
After that happened several times I began to think, and I got to look at my case from a
different angle. Finally I tumbled. It was plain that I had been used by Dan Williamson.
It made me angry to think it, but still angrier that I had not tumbled to it quicker. As
soon as I had gone over the whole thing in my mind I went to Dan Williamson, told him
I was through with the firm, and I quit the office of Williamson & Brown. I had no
words with him or any of his partners. What good would that have done me? But I will
admit that I was sore at myself quite as much as at Williamson & Brown.
The loss of the money didn't bother me. Whenever I have lost money in the stock market
I have always considered that I have learned something; that if I have lost money I have
gained experience, so that the money really went for a tuition fee. A man has to have
experience and he has to pay for it. But there was something that hurt a whole lot in that
experience of mine in Dan Williamson's office, and that was the loss of a great
opportunity. The money a man loses is nothing; he can make it up. But opportunities
such as I had then do not come every day.
The market, you see, had been a fine trading market. I was right; I mean, I was reading it
accurately. The opportunity to make millions was there. But I allowed my gratitude to
interfere with my play. I tied my own hands. I had to do what Dan Williamson in his
kindness wished done. Altogether it was more unsatisfactory than doing business with a
relative. Bad business!
And that wasn't the worst thing about it. It was that after that there was practically no
opportunity for me to make big money. The market flattened out. Things drifted from
bad to worse. I not only lost all I had but got into debt again more heavily than ever.
Those were long lean years, 1911, 1912, 1913 and 1914. There was no money to be
made. The opportunity simply wasn't there and so I was worse off than ever.
It isn't uncomfortable to lose when the loss is not accompanied by a poignant vision of
what might have been. That was precisely what I could not keep my mind from dwelling
on, and of course it unsettled me further. I learned that the weaknesses to which a
speculator is prone are almost numberless. It was proper for me as a man to act the way I
did in Dan Williamson's office, but it was improper and unwise for me as a speculator to
allow myself to be influenced by any consideration to act against my own judgment.
Noblesse oblige but not in the stock market, because the tape is not chivalrous and
moreover does not reward loyalty. I realise that I couldn't have acted differently. I
couldn't make myself over just because I wished to trade in the stock market. But
business is business always, and my business as a speculator is to back my own
judgment always.
It was a very curious experience. I'll tell you what I think happened. Dan Williamson
was perfectly sincere in what he told me when he first saw me. Every time his firm did a
few thousand shares in any one stock the Street jumped at the conclusion that Alvin
Marquand was buying or selling. He was the big trader of the office, to be sure, and he
gave this firm all his business; and he was one of the best and biggest traders they have
ever had in Wall Street. Well, I was to be used as a smoke screen, particularly for
Marquand's selling.
Alvin Marquand fell sick shortly after I went in. His ailment was early diagnosed as
incurable, and Dan Williamson of course knew it long before Marquand himself did.
That is why Dan covered my Chesapeake & Atlantic stock. He had begun to liquidate
some of his brother-in-law's speculative holdings of that and other stocks.
Of course when Marquand died the estate had to liquidate his speculative and
semispeculative lines, and by that time we had run into a bear market. By tying me up
the way he did, Dan was helping the estate a whole lot. I do not speak boastfully when I
say that I was a very heavy trader and that I was dead right in my views on the stock
market. I know that Williamson remembered my successful operations in the bear
market of 1907 and he couldn't afford to run the risk of having me at large. Why, if I had
kept on the way I was going I'd have made so much money that by the time he was
trying to liquidate part of Alvin Marquand's estate I would have been trading in
hundreds of thousands of shares. As an active bear I would have done damage running
into the millions of dollars to the Marquand heirs, for Alvin left only a little over a
couple of hundred millions.
It was much cheaper for them to let me get into debt and then to pay off the debt than to
have me in some other office operating actively on the bear side. That is precisely what
1 would have been doing but for my feeling that I must not be outdone in decency by
Dan Williamson.
I have always considered this the most interesting and most unfortunate of all my
experiences as a stock operator. As a lesson it cost me a disproportionately high price. It
put off the time of my recovery several years. I was young enough to wait with patience
for the strayed millions to come back. But five years is a long time for a man to be poor.
Young or old, it is not to be relished. I could do without the yachts a great deal easier
than I could without a market to come back on. The greatest opportunity of a lifetime
was holding before my very nose the purse I had lost. I could not put out my hand and
reach for it. A very shrewd boy, that Dan Williamson; as slick as they make them;
farsighted, ingenious, daring. He is a thinker, has imagination, detects the vulnerable
spot in any man and can plan cold-bloodedly to hit it. He did his own sizing up and soon
doped out just what to do to me in order to reduce me to complete inoffensiveness in the
market. He did not actually do me out of any money. On the contrary, he was to all
appearances extremely nice about it. He loved his sister, Mrs. Marquand, and he did his
duty toward her as he saw it.



Chapter XIV
It has always rankled in my mind that after I left Williamson & Brown's office the cream
was off the market. We ran smack into a long moneyless period; four mighty lean years.
There was not a penny to be made. As Billy Hen-riquez once said, "It was the kind of
market in which not even a skunk could make a scent."
It looked to me as though I was in Dutch with destiny. It might have been the plan of
Providence to chasten me, but really I had not been filled with such pride as called for a
fall. I had not committed any of those speculative sins which a trader must expiate on
the debtor side of the account. I was not guilty of a typical sucker play. What I had done,
or, rather, what I had left undone, was something for which I would have received praise
and not blame north of Forty-second Street. In Wall Street it was absurd and costly. But
by far the worst thing about it was the tendency it had to make a man a little less
inclined to permit himself human feelings in the ticker district.
I left Williamson's and tried other brokers' offices. In every one of them I lost money. It
served me right, because I was trying to force the market into giving me what it didn't
have to give to wit, opportunities for making money. I did not find any trouble in getting
credit, because those who knew me had faith in me. You can get an idea of how strong
their confidence was when I tell you that when I finally stopped trading on credit I owed
well over one million dollars.
The trouble was not that I had lost my grip but that during those four wretched years the
opportunities for making money simply didn't exist. Still I plugged along, trying to make
a stake and succeeding only in increasing my indebtedness. After I ceased trading on my
own hook because I wouldn't owe my friends any more money I made a living handling
accounts for people who believed I knew the game well enough to beat it even in a dull
market. For my services I received a percentage of the profits when there were any. That
is how I lived. Well, say that is how I sustained life.
Of course, I didn't always lose, but I never made enough to allow me materially to
reduce what I owed. Finally, as things got worse, I felt the beginnings of discouragement
for the first time in my life.
Everything seemed to have gone wrong with me. I did not go about bewailing the
descent from millions and yachts to debts and the simple life. I didn't enjoy the situation,
but I did not fill up with self-pity. I did not propose to wait patiently for time and
Providence to bring about the cessation of my discomforts. I therefore studied my
problem. It was plain that the only way out of my troubles was by making money. To
make money I needed merely to trade successfully. I had so traded before and I must do
so once more. More than once in the past I had run up a shoe string into hundreds of
thousands. Sooner or later the market would offer me an opportunity.
I convinced myself that whatever was wrong was wrong with me and not with the
market. Now what could be the trouble with me? I asked myself that question in the
same spirit in which I always study the various phases of my trading problems. I thought
about it calmly and came to the conclusion that my main trouble came from worrying
over the money I owed. I was never free from the mental discomfort of it. I must explain
to you that it was not the mere consciousness of my indebtedness. Any business man
contracts debts in the course of his regular business. Most of my debts were really
nothing but business debts, due to what were unfavourable business conditions for me,
and no worse than a merchant suffers from, for instance, when there is an unusually
prolonged spell of unseasonable weather.
Of course as time went on and I could not pay I began to feel less philosophical about
my debts. I'll explain: I owed over a million dollars all of it stock-market losses,
remember. Most of my creditors were very nice and didn't bother me; but there were two
who did bedevil me. They used to follow me around. Every time I made a winning each
of them was Johnny-on-the-spot, wanting to know all about it and insisting on getting
theirs right off. One of them, to whom I owed eight hundred dollars, threatened to sue
me, seize my furniture, and so forth. I can't conceive why he thought I was concealing
assets, unless it was that I didn't quite look like a stage hobo about to die of destitution.
As I studied the problem I saw that it wasn't a case that called for reading the tape but
for reading my own self. I quite cold-bloodedly reached the conclusion that I would
never be able to accomplish anything useful so long as I was worried, and it was equally
plain that I should be worried so long as I owed money. I mean, as long as any creditor
had the power to vex me or to interfere with my coming back by insisting upon being
paid before I could get a decent stake together. This was all so obviously true that I said
to myself, "I must go through bankruptcy." What else could relieve my mind?
It sounds both easy and sensible, doesn't it? But it was more than unpleasant, I can tell
you. I hated to do it. I hated to put myself in a position to be misunderstood or
misjudged. I myself never cared much for money. I never thought enough of it to
consider it worth while lying for. But I knew that everybody didn't feel that way. Of
course I also knew that if I got on my feet again I'd pay everybody off, for the obligation
remained. But unless I was able to trade in the old way I'd never be able to pay back that
million.
I nerved myself and went to see my creditors. It was a mighty difficult thing for me to
do, for all that most of them were personal friends or old acquaintances.
I explained the situation quite frankly to them. I said: "I am not going to take this step
because I don't wish to pay you but because, in justice to both myself and you, I must
put myself in a position to make money. I have been thinking of this solution off and on
for over two years, but I simply didn't have the nerve to come out and say so frankly to
you. It would have been infinitely better for all of us if I had. It all simmers down to this:
I positively cannot be my old self while I am harassed or upset by these debts. I have
decided to do now what I should have done a year ago. I have no other reason than the
one I have just given you."
What the first man said was to all intents and purposes what all of them said. He spoke
for his firm.
"Livingston," he said, "we understand. We realise your position perfectly. I'll tell you
what we'll do: we'll just give you a release. Have your lawyer prepare any kind of paper
you wish, and we'll sign it."
That was in substance what all my big creditors said. That is one side of Wall Street for
you. It wasn't merely careless good nature or sportsmanship. It was also a mighty
intelligent decision, for it was clearly good business. I appreciated both the good will
and the business gumption.
These creditors gave me a release on debts amounting to over a million dollars. But
there were the two minor .creditors who wouldn't sign off. One of them was the eighthundred-
dollar man I told you about. I also owed sixty thousand dollars to a brokerage
firm which had gone into bankruptcy, and the receivers, who didn't know me from
Adam, were on my neck early and late. Even if they had been disposed to follow the
example set by my largest creditors I don't suppose the court would have let them sign
off. At all events my schedule of bankruptcy amounted to only about one hundred
thousand dollars; though, as I said, I owed well over a million.
It was extremely disagreeable to see the story in the newspapers. I had always paid my
debts in full and this new experience was most mortifying to me. I knew I'd pay off
everybody some day if I lived, but everybody who read the article wouldn't know it. I
was ashamed to go out after I saw the report in the newspapers. But it all wore off
presently and I cannot tell you how intense was my feeling of relief to know that I wasn't
going to be harried any more by people who didn't understand how a man must give his
entire mind to his business if he wishes to succeed in stock speculation.
My mind now being free to take up trading with some prospect of success, unvexed by
debts, the next step was to get another stake. The Stock Exchange had been closed from
July thirty-first to the middle of December, 1914, and Wall Street was in the dumps.
There hadn't been any business whatever in a long time. I owed all my friends. I couldn't
very well ask them to help me again just because they had been so pleasant and friendly
to me, when I knew that nobody was in a position to do much for anybody.
It was a mighty difficult task, getting a decent stake, for with the closing of the Stock
Exchange there was nothing that I could ask any broker to do for me. I tried in a couple
of places. No use.
Finally I went to see Dan Williamson. This was in February, 1915. I told him that I had
rid myself of the mental incubus of debt and I was ready to trade as of old. You will
recall that when he needed me he offered me the use of twenty-five thousand dollars
without my asking him.
Now that I needed him he said, "When you see something' that looks good to you and
you want to buy five hundred shares go ahead and it will be all right."
I thanked him and went away. He had kept me from making a great deal of money and
the office had made a lot in commissions from me. I admit I was a little sore to think that
Williamson & Brown didn't give me a decent stake. I intended to trade conservatively at
first. It would make my financial recovery easier and quicker if I could begin with a line
a little better than five hundred shares. But, anyhow, I realised that, such as it was, there
was my chance to come back.
I left Dan Williamson's office and studied the situation in general and my own problem
in particular. It was a bull market. That was as plain to me as it was to thousands of
traders. But my stake consisted merely of an offer to carry five hundred shares for me.
That is, I had no leeway, limited as I was. I couldn't afford even a slight setback at the
beginning. I must build up my stake with my very first play. That initial purchase of
mine of five hundred shares must be profitable. I had to make real money. I knew that
unless I had sufficient trading capital I would not be able to use good judgment. Without
adequate margins it would be impossible to take the cold-blooded, dispassionate attitude
toward the game that comes from the ability to afford a few minor losses such as I often
incurred in testing the market before putting down the big bet.
I think now that I found myself then at the most critical period of my career as a
speculator. If I failed this time there was no telling where or when, if ever, I might get
another stake for another try. It was very clear that I simply must wait for the exact
psychological moment.
I didn't go near Williamson & Brown's. I mean, I purposely kept away from them for six
long weeks of steady tape reading. I was afraid that if I went to the office, knowing that I
could buy five hundred shares, I might be tempted into trading at the wrong time or in
the wrong stock. A trader, in addition to studying basic conditions, remembering market
precedents and keeping in mind the psychology of the outside public as well as the
limitations of his brokers, must also know himself and provide against his own
weaknesses. There is no need to feel anger over being human. I have come to feel that it
is as necessary to know how to read myself as to know how to read the tape. I have
studied and reckoned on my own reactions to given impulses or to the inevitable
temptations of an active market, quite in the same mood and spirit as I have considered
crop conditions or analysed reports of earnings.
So day after day, broke and anxious to resume trading, I sat in front of a quotation-board
in another broker's office where I couldn't buy or sell as much as one share of stock,
studying the market, not missing a single transaction on the tape, watching for the
psychological moment to ring the full-speed-ahead bell.
By reason of conditions known to the whole world the stock 1 was most bullish on in
those critical days of early 1915 was Bethlehem Steel. I was morally certain it was going
way up, but in order to make sure that I would win on my very first play, as I must, I
decided to wait until it crossed par.
I think I have told you it has been my experience that whenever a stock crosses 100 or
200 or 300 for the first time, it nearly always keeps going up for 30 to 50 points and
after 300 faster than after 100 or 200. One of my first big coups was in Anaconda, which
I bought when it crossed 200 and sold a day later at 260. My practice of buying a stock
just after it crossed par dated back to my early bucket-shop days. It is an old trading
principle.
You can imagine how keen I was to get back to trading on my old scale. I was so eager
to begin that I could not think of anything else; but I held myself in leash. I saw
Bethlehem Steel climb, every day, higher and higher, as I was sure it would, and yet
there I was checking my impulse to run over to Williamson & Brown's office and buy
five hundred shares. I knew I simply had to make my initial operation as nearly a cinch
as was humanly possible.
Every point that stock went up meant five hundred dollars I had not made. The first ten
points' advance meant that I would have been able to pyramid, and instead of five
hundred snares I might now be carrying one thousand shares that would be earning for
me one thousand dollars a point. But I sat tight and instead of listening to my loudmouthed
hopes or to my clamorous beliefs I heeded only the level voice of my
experience and the counsel of common sense. Once I got a decent stake together I could
afford to take chances. But without a stake, taking chances, even slight chances, was a
luxury utterly beyond my reach. Six weeks of patience but, in the end, a victory for
common sense over greed and hope!
I really began to waver and sweat blood when the stock got up to 90. Think of what I
had not made by not buying, when I was so bullish. Well, when it got to 98 I said to
myself, "Bethlehem is going through 100, and when it does the roof is going to blow
clean off!" The tape said the same thing more than plainly. In fact, it used a megaphone.
I tell you, I saw 100 on the tape when the ticker was only printing
98. And I knew that wasn't the voice of my hope or the sight of my desire, but the
assertion of my tape-reading instinct. So I said to myself, "I can't wait until it gets
through 100. I have to get it now. It is as good as gone through par."
I rushed to Williamson & Brown's office and put in an order to buy five hundred shares
of Bethlehem Steel. The market was then 98. I got five hundred shares at 98 to 99. After
that she shot right up, and closed that night, I think, at 114 or 115. I bought five hundred
shares more.
The next day Bethlehem Steel was 145 and I had my stake. But I earned it. Those six
weeks of waiting for the right moment were the most strenuous and wearing six weeks I
ever put in. But it paid me, for I now had enough capital to trade in fair-sized lots. I
never would have got anywhere just on five hundred shares of stock.
There is a great deal in starting right, whatever the enterprise may be, and I did very well
after my Bethlehem deal so well, indeed, that you would not have believed it was the
selfsame man trading. As a matter of fact I wasn't the same man, for where I had been
harassed and wrong I was now at ease and right. There were no creditors to annoy and
no lack of funds to interfere with my thinking or with my listening to the truthful voice
of experience, and so I was winning right along.
All of a sudden, as I was on my way to a sure fortune, we had the Lusitania break. Every
once in a while a man gets a crack like that in the solar plexus, probably that he may be
reminded of the sad fact that no human being can be so uniformly right on the market as
to be beyond the reach of unprofitable accidents. I have heard people say that no
professional speculator need have been hit very hard by the news of the torpedoing of
the Lusitania, and they go on to tell how they had it long before the Street did. I was not
clever enough to escape by means of advance information, and all I can tell you is that
on account of what I lost through the Lusitania break and one or two other reverses that I
wasn't wise enough to foresee, I found myself at the end of 1915 with a balance at my
brokers' of about one hundred and forty thousand dollars. That was all I actually made,
though I was consistently right on the market throughout the greater part of the year.
I did much better during the following year. I was very lucky. I was rampantly bullish in
a wild bull market. Things were certainly coming my way so that there wasn't anything
to do but to make money. It made me remember a saying of the late H. H. Rogers, of the
Standard Oil Company, to the effect that there were times when a man could no more
help making money than he could help getting wet if he went out in a rainstorm without
an umbrella. It was the most clearly defined bull market we ever had. It was plain to
everybody that the Allied purchases of all kinds of supplies here made the United States
the most prosperous nation in the world. We had all the things that no one else had for
sale, and we were fast getting all the cash in the world. I mean that the wide world's gold
was pouring into this country in torrents. Inflation was inevitable, and, of course, that
meant rising prices for everything.
All this was so evident from the first that little or no manipulation for the rise was
needed. That was the reason why the preliminary work was so much less than in other
bull markets. And not only was the war-bride boom more naturally developed than all
others but it proved unprecedentedly profitable for the general public. That is, the stockmarket
winnings during 1915 were more widely distributed than in any other boom in
the history of Wall Street. That the public did not turn all their paper profits into good
hard cash or that they did not long keep what profits they actually took was merely
history repeating itself. Nowhere does history indulge in repetitions so often or so
uniformly as in Wall Street. When you read contemporary accounts of booms or panics
the one thing that strikes you most forcibly is how little either stock speculation or stock
speculators to-day differ from yesterday. The game does not change and neither does
human nature.
I went along with the rise in 1916. I was as bullish as the next man, but of course I kept
my eyes open. I knew, as everybody did, that there must be an end, and I was on the
watch for warning signals. I wasn't particularly interested in guessing from which
quarter the tip would come and so I didn't stare at just one spot. I was not, and I never
have felt that I was, wedded indissolubly to one or the other side of the market. That a
bull market has added to my bank account or a bear market has been particularly
generous I do not consider sufficient reason for sticking to the bull or the bear side after
I receive the get-out warning. A man does not swear eternal allegiance to either the bull
or the bear side. His concern lies with being right.
And there is another thing to remember, and that is that a market does not culminate in
one grand blaze of glory. Neither does it end with a sudden reversal of form. A market
can and does often cease to be a bull market long before prices generally begin to break.
My long expected warning came to me when I noticed that, one after another, those
stocks which had been the leaders of the market reacted several points from the top and
for the first time in many months did not come back. Their race evidently was run, and
that clearly necessitated a change in my trading tactics.
It was simple enough. In a bull market the trend of prices, of course, is decidedly and
definitely upward. Therefore whenever a stock goes against the general trend you are
justified in assuming that there is something wrong with that particular stock. It is
enough for the experienced trader to perceive that something is wrong. He must not
expect the tape to become a lecturer. His job is to listen for it to say "Get out!" and not
wait for it to submit a legal brief for approval.
As I said before, I noticed that stocks which had been the leaders of the wonderful
advance had ceased to advance. They dropped six or seven points and stayed there. At
the same time the rest of the market kept on advancing under new standard bearers.
Since nothing wrong had developed with the companies themselves, the reason had to be
sought elsewhere. Those stocks had gone with the current for months. When they ceased
to do so, though the bull tide was still running strong, it meant that for those particular
stocks the bull market was over. For the rest of the list the tendency was still decidedly
upward.
There was no need to be perplexed into inactivity, for there were really no cross
currents. I did not turn bearish on the market then, because the tape didn't tell me to do
so. The end of the bull market had not come, though it was within hailing distance.
Pending its arrival there was still bull money to be made. Such being the case, I merely
turned bearish on the stocks which had stopped advancing and as the rest of the market
had rising power behind it I both bought and sold.
The leaders that had ceased to lead I sold. I put out a short line of five thousand shares in
each of them; and then I went long of the new leaders. The stocks I was short of didn't
do much, but my long stocks kept on rising. When finally these in turn ceased to
advance I sold them out and went short five thousand shares of each. By this time I was
more bearish than bullish, because obviously the next big money was going to be made
on the down side. While I felt certain that the bear market had really begun before the
bull market had really ended, I knew the time for being a rampant bear was not yet.
There was no sense in being more royalist than the king; especially in being so too soon.
The tape merely said that patrolling parties from the main bear army had dashed by.
Time to get ready.
I kept on both buying and selling until after about a month's trading I had out a short line
of sixty thousand shares five thousand shares each in a dozen different stocks which
earlier in the year had been the public's favourites because they had been the leaders of
the great bull market. It was not a very heavy line; but don't forget that neither was the
market definitely bearish.
Then one day the entire market became quite weak and prices of all stocks began to fall.
When I had a profit of at least four points in each and every one of the twelve stocks that
I was short of, I knew that I was right. The tape told me it was now safe to be bearish, so
I promptly doubled up.
I had my position. I was short of stocks in a market that now was plainly a bear market.
There wasn't any need for me to push things along. The market was bound to go my
way, and, knowing that, I could afford to wait. After I doubled up I didn't make another
trade for a long tune. About seven weeks after I put out my full line, we had the famous
"leak," and stocks broke badly. It was said that somebody had advance news from
Washington that President Wilson was going to issue a message that would bring back
the dove of peace to Europe in a hurry. Of course the war-bride boom was started and
kept up by the World War, and peace was a bear item. When one of the cleverest traders
on the floor was accused of profiting by advance information he simply said he had sold
stocks not on any news but because he considered that the bull market was overripe. I
myself had doubled my line of shorts seven weeks before.
On the news the market broke badly and I naturally covered. It was the only play
possible. When something happens on which you did not count when you made your
plans it behooves you to utilise the opportunity that a kindly fate offers you. For one
thing, on a bad break like that you have a big market, one that you can turn around in,
and that is the time to turn your paper profits into real money. Even in a bear market a
man cannot always cover one hundred and twenty thousand shares of stock without
putting up the price on himself. He must wait for the market that will allow him to buy
that much at no damage to his profit as it stands him on paper.
I should like to point out that I was not counting on that particular break at that
particular time for that particular reason. But, as I have told you before, my experience
of thirty years as a trader is that such accidents are usually along the line of least
resistance on which I base my position in the market. Another thing to bear in mind is
this: Never try to sell at the top. It isn't wise. Sell after a reaction if there is no rally.
I cleared about three million dollars in 1916 by being bullish as long as the bull market
lasted and then by being bearish when the bear market started. As I said before, a man
does not have to marry one side of the market till death do them part.
That winter I went South, to Palm Beach, as I usually do for a vacation, because I am
very fond of saltwater fishing.
I was short of stocks and wheat, and both lines showed me a handsome profit. There
wasn't anything to annoy me and I was having a good time. Of course unless I go to
Europe I cannot really be out of touch with the stock or commodities markets. For
instance, in the Adirondacks I have a direct wire from my broker's office to my house.
In Palm Beach I used to go to my broker's branch office regularly. I noticed that cotton,
in which I had no interest, was strong and rising. About that time this was in 1917 -I
heard a great deal about the efforts that President Wilson was making to bring about
peace. The reports came from Washington, both in the shape of press dispatches and
private advices to friends in Palm Beach. That is the reason why one day I got the notion
that the course of the various markets reflected confidence in Mr. Wilson's success. With
peace supposedly close at hand, stocks and wheat ought to go down and cotton up. I was
all set as far as stocks and wheat went, but I had not done anything in cotton in some
time.
At 2:20 that afternoon I did not own a single bale, but at 2:25 my belief that peace was
impending made me buy fifteen thousand bales as a starter. I proposed to follow my old
system of trading that is, of buying my full line which I have already described to you.
That very afternoon, after the market closed, we got the Unrestricted Warfare note.
There wasn't anything to do except to wait for the market to open the next day. I recall
that at Gridley's that night one of the greatest captains of industry in the country was
offering to sell any amount of United States Steel at five points below the closing price
that afternoon. There were several Pittsburgh millionaires within hearing. Nobody took
the big man's offer. They knew there was bound to be a whopping big break at the
opening.
Sure enough, the next morning the stock and commodity markets were in an uproar, as
you can imagine. Some stocks opened eight points below the previous night's close. To
me that meant a heaven-sent opportunity to cover all my shorts profitably. As I said
before, in a bear market it is always wise to cover if complete demoralisation suddenly
develops.
That is the only way, if you swing a good-sized line, of turning a big paper profit into
real money both quickly and without regrettable reductions. For instance, I was short
fifty thousand shares of United States Steel alone. Of course I was short of other stocks,
and when I saw I had the market to cover in, I did. My profits amounted to about one
and a half million dollars. It was not a chance to disregard.
Cotton, of which I was long fifteen thousand bales, bought in the last half hour of the
trading the previous afternoon, opened down five hundred points. Some break! It meant
an overnight loss of three hundred and seventy-five thousand dollars. While it was
perfectly clear that the only wise play in stocks and wheat was to cover on the break I
was not so clear as to what I ought to do in cotton. There were various things to
consider, and while I always take my loss the moment I am convinced I am wrong, I did
not like to take that loss that morning. Then I reflected that I had gone South to have a
good time fishing instead of perplexing myself over the course of the cotton market.
And, moreover, I had taken such big profits in my wheat and in stocks that I decided to
take my Joss in cotton. I would figure that my profit had been a little more than one
million instead of over a million and a half. It was all a matter of bookkeeping, as
promoters are apt to tell you when you ask too many questions.
If I hadn't bought that cotton just before the market closed the day before, I would have
saved that four hundred thousand dollars. It shows you how quickly a man may lose big
money on a moderate line. My main position was absolutely correct and I benefited by
an accident of a nature diametrically opposite to the considerations that led me to take
the position I did in stocks and wheat. Observe, please, that the speculative line of least
resistance again demonstrated its value to a trader. Prices went as I expected,
notwithstanding the unexpected market factor introduced by the German note. If things
had turned out as I had figured I would have been 100 per cent right in all three of my
lines, for with peace stocks and wheat would have gone down and cotton would have
gone kiting up. I would have cleaned up in all three. Irrespective of peace or war, I was
right in my position on the stock market and in wheat and that is why the unlooked-for
event helped. In cotton I based my play on something that might happen outside of the
market that is, I bet on Mr. Wilson's success in his peace negotiations. It was the
German military leaders who made me lose the cotton bet.
When I returned to New York early in 1917 I paid back all the money I owed, which
was over a million dollars. 16 was a great pleasure to me to pay my debts. I might have
paid it back a few months earlier, but I didn't for a very simple reason. I was trading
actively and successfully and I needed all the capital I had. I owed it to myself as well as
to the men I considered my creditors to take every advantage of the wonderful markets
we had in 1915 and 1916. I knew that I would make a great deal of money and I wasn't
worrying because I was letting them wait a few months longer for money many of them
never expected to get back. I did not wish to pay off my obligations in driblets or to one
man at a time, but in full to all at once. So as long as the market was doing all it could
for me I just kept on trading on as big a scale as my resources permitted.
I wished to pay interest, but all those creditors who had signed releases positively
refused to accept it. The man I paid off the last of all was the chap I owed the eight
hundred dollars to, who had made my life a burden and had upset me until I couldn't
trade. I let him wait until he heard that I had paid off all the others. Then he got his
money. I wanted to teach him to be considerate the next time somebody owed him a few
hundreds.
And that is how I came back.
After I paid off my debts in full I put a pretty fair amount into annuities. I made up my
mind I wasn't going to be strapped and uncomfortable and minus a stake ever again. Of
course, after I married I put some money in trust for my wife. And after the boy came I
put some in trust for him.
The reason I did this was not alone the fear that the stock market might, take it away
from me, but because I knew that a man will spend anything he can lay his hands on. By
doing what I did my wife and child are safe from me.
More than one man I know has done the same thing, but has coaxed his wife to sign off
when he needed the money, and he has lost it. But I have fixed it up so that no matter
what I want or what my wife wants, that trust holds. It is absolutely safe from all attacks
by either of us; safe from my market needs; safe even from a devoted wife's love. I'm
taking no chances!



Chapter XV
Among the hazards of speculation the happening of the unexpected I might even say of
the unexpectable ranks high. There are certain chances that the most prudent man is
justified in taking chances that he must take if he wishes to be more than a mercantile
mollusk. Normal business hazards are no worse than the risks a man runs when he goes
out of his house into the street or sets out on a railroad journey. When I lose money by
reason of some development which nobody could foresee I think no more vindictively of
it than I do of an inconveniently timed storm. Life itself from the cradle to the grave is a
gamble and what happens to me because I do not possess the gift of second sight I can
bear undisturbed. But there have been times in my career as a speculator when I have
both been right and played square and nevertheless I have been cheated out of my
earnings by the sordid unfairness of unsportsmanlike opponents.
Against misdeeds by crooks, cowards and crowds a quick-thinking or far-sighted
business man can protect himself. I have never gone up against downright dishonesty
except in a bucket shop or two because even there honesty was the best policy; the big
money was in being square and not in welshing. I have never thought it good business to
play any game in any place where it was necessary to keep an eye on the dealer because
he was likely to cheat if unwatched. But against the whining welsher the decent man is
powerless. Fair play is fair play. I could tell you a dozen instances where I have been the
victim of my own belief in the sacredness of the pledged word or of the inviolability of a
gentlemen's agreement. I shall not do so because no useful purpose can be served
thereby.
Fiction writers, clergymen and women are fond of alluding to the floor of the. Stock
Exchange as a boodlers' battlefield and to Wall Street's daily business as a fight. It is
quite dramatic but utterly misleading. I do not think that my business is strife and
contest. I never fight either individuals or speculative cliques. I merely differ in opinion
that is, in my reading of basic conditions. What playwrights call battles of business are
not fights between human beings. They are merely tests of business vision. I try to stick
to facts and facts only, and govern my actions accordingly. That is Bernard
M. Baruch's recipe for success in wealth-winning. Sometimes I do not see the facts all
the facts clearly enough or early enough; or else I do not reason logically. Whenever any
of these things happen I lose. I am wrong. And it always costs me money to be wrong.
No reasonable man objects to paying for his mistakes. There are no preferred creditors
in mistake-making and no exceptions or exemptions. But I object to losing money when
I am right. I do not mean, either, those deals that have cost me money because of sudden
changes in the rules of some particular exchange. I have in mind certain hazards of
speculation that from time to time remind a man that no profit should be counted safe
until it is deposited in your bank to your credit.
After the Great War broke out in Europe there began the rise in the prices of
commodities that was to be expected. It was as easy to foresee that as to foresee war
inflation. Of course the general advance continued as the war prolonged itself. As you
may remember, I was busy "coming back" in 1915. The boom in stocks was there and it
was my duty to utilise it. My safest, easiest and quickest big play was in the stock
market, and I was lucky, as you know.
By July, 1917, I not only had been able to pay off all my debts but was quite a little to
the good besides. This meant that I now had the time, the money and the inclination to
consider trading in commodities as well as in stocks. For many years I have made it my
practice to study all the markets. The advance in commodity prices over the pre-war
level ranged from 100 to 400 per cent. There was only one exception, and that was
coffee. Of course there was a reason for this. The breaking out of the war meant the
closing up of European markets and huge cargoes were sent to this country, which was
the one big market. That led in time to an enormous surplus of raw coffee here, and that,
in turn, kept the price low. Why, when I first began to consider its speculative
possibilities coffee was actually selling below pre-war prices. If the reasons for this
anomaly were plain, no less plain was it that the active and increasingly efficient
operation by the German and Austrian submarines must mean an appalling reduction in
the number of ships available for commercial purposes. This eventually in turn must
lead to dwindling imports of coffee. With reduced receipts and an unchanged
consumption the surplus stocks must be absorbed, and when that happened the price of
coffee must do what the prices of all other commodities had done, which was, go way
up.
It didn't require a Sherlock Holmes to size up the situation. Why everybody did not buy
coffee I cannot tell you. When I decided to buy it I did not consider it a speculation. It
was much more of an investment. I knew it would take time to cash in, but I knew also
that it was bound to yield a good profit. That made it a conservative investment
operation a banker's act rather than a gambler's play.
I started my buying operations in the winter of 1917. I took quite a lot of coffee. The
market, however, did nothing to speak of. It continued inactive and as for the price, it
did not go up as I had expected. The outcome of it all was that I simply carried my line
to no purpose for nine long months. My contracts expired then and I sold out all my
options. I took a whopping big loss on that deal and yet I was sure my views were
sound. I had been clearly wrong in the matter of time, but I was confident that coffee
must advance as all commodities had done, so that no sooner had I sold out my line than
I started in to buy again. I bought three times as much coffee as I had so unprofitably
carried during those nine disappointing months. Of course I bought deferred options for
as long a time as I could get.
I was not so wrong now. As soon as I had taken on my trebled line the market began to
go up. People everywhere seemed to realise all of a sudden what was bound to happen in
the coffee market. It began to look as if my investment was going to return me a mighty
good rate of interest.
The sellers of the contracts I held were roasters, mostly of German names and
affiliations, who had bought the coffee in Brazil confidently expecting to bring it to this
country. But there were no ships to bring it, and presently they found themselves in the
uncomfortable position of having no end of coffee down there and being heavily short of
it to me up here. Please bear in mind that I first became bullish on coffee while the price
was practically at a pre-war level, and don't forget that after I bought it I carried it the
greater part of a year and then took a big loss on it. The punishment for being wrong is
to lose money. The reward for being right is to make money. Being clearly right and
carrying a big line, I was justified in expecting to make a killing. It would not take much
of an advance to make my profit satisfactory to me, for I was carrying several hundred
thousand bags. I don't like to talk about my operations in figures because sometimes
they sound rather formidable and people might think I was boasting. As a matter of fact
I trade in accordance to my means and always leave myself an ample margin of safety.
In this instance I was conservative enough. The reason I bought options so freely was
because I couldn't see how I could lose. Conditions were in my favour. I had been made
to wait a year, but now I was going to be paid both for my waiting and for being right. I
could see the profit coming fast. There wasn't any cleverness about it. It was simply that
I wasn't blind.
Coming sure and fast, that profit of millions! But it never reached me. No; it wasn't sidetracked
by a sudden change in conditions. The market did not experience an abrupt
reversal of form. Coffee did not pour into the country. What happened? The
unexpectable! What had never happened in anybody's experience; what I therefore had
no reason to guard against. I added a new one to the long list of hazards of speculation
that I must always keep before me. It was simply that the fellows who had sold me the
coffee, the shorts, knew what was in store for them, and in their efforts to squirm out of
the position into which they had sold themselves, devised a new way of welshing. They
rushed to Washington for help, and got it.
Perhaps you remember that the Government had evolved various plans for preventing
further profiteering in necessities. You know how most of them worked. Well, the
philanthropic coffee shorts appeared before the Price Fixing Committee of the War
Industries Board I think that was the official designation and made a patriotic appeal to
that body to protect the American breakfaster. They asserted that a professional
speculator, one Lawrence Livingston, had cornered, or was about to corner, coffee. If his
speculative plans were not brought to naught he would take advantage of the conditions
created by the war and the American people would be forced to pay exorbitant prices for
their daily coffee. It was unthinkable to the patriots who had sold me cargoes of coffee
they couldn't find ships for, that one hundred millions of Americans, more or less,
should pay tribute to conscienceless speculators. They represented the coffee trade, not
the coffee gamblers, and they were willing to help the Government curb profiteering
actual or prospective.
Now I have a horror of whiners and I do not mean to intimate that the Price Fixing
Committee was not doing its honest best to curb profiteering and wastefulness. But that
need not stop me from expressing the opinion that the committee could not have gone
very deeply into the particular problem of the coffee market. They fixed on a maximum
price for raw coffee and also fixed a time limit for closing out all existing contracts. This
decision meant, of course, that the Coffee Exchange would have to go out of business.
There was only one thing for me to do and I did it, and that was to sell out all my
contracts. Those profits of millions that I had deemed as certain to come my way as any
I ever made failed completely to materialise. I was and am as keen as anybody against
the profiteer in the necessaries of life, but at the time the Price Fixing Committee made
their ruling on coffee, all other commodities were selling at from 250 to 400 per cent
above pre-war prices while raw coffee was actually below the average prevailing for
some years before the war. I can't see that it made any real difference who held the
coffee. The price was bound to advance; and the reason for that was not the operations
of conscienceless speculators, but the dwindling surplus for which the diminishing
importations were responsible, and they in turn were affected exclusively by the
appalling destruction of the world's ships by the German submarines. The committee did
not wait for coffee to start; they clamped on the brakes.
As a matter of policy and of expediency it was a mistake to force the Coffee Exchange
to close just then. If the committee had let coffee alone the price undoubtedly would
have risen for the reasons I have already stated, which had nothing to do with any
alleged corner. But the high price which need not have been exorbitant would have been
an incentive to attract supplies to this market. I have heard Mr. Bernard M. Baruch say
that the War Industries Board took into consideration this factor the insuring of a supply
in fixing prices, and for that reason some of the complaints about the high limit on
certain commodities were unjust. When the Coffee Exchange resumed business, later on,
coffee sold at twenty-three cents. The American people paid that price because of the
small supply, and the supply was small because the price had been fixed too low, at the
suggestion of philanthropic shorts, to make it possible to pay the high ocean freights and
thus insure continued importations.
I have always thought that my coffee deal was the most legitimate of all my trades in
commodities. I considered it more of an investment than a speculation. I was in it over a
year. If there was any gambling it was done by the patriotic roasters with German names
and ancestry. They had coffee in Brazil and they sold it to me in New York. The Price
Fixing Committee fixed the price of the only commodity that had not advanced. They
protected the public against profiteering before it started, but not against the inevitable
higher Prices that followed. Not only that, but even when green coffee hung around nine
cents a pound, roasted coffee went up with everything else. It was only the roasters who
benefited. If the price of green coffee had gone up two or three cents a pound it would
have meant several millions for me. And it wouldn't have cost the public as much as the
later advance did.
Post-mortems in speculation are a waste of time. They get you nowhere. But this
particular deal has a certain educational value. It was as pretty as any I ever went into.
The rise was so sure, so logical, that I figured that I simply couldn't help making several
millions of dollars. But I didn't.
On two other occasions I have suffered from the action of exchange committees making
rulings that changed trading rules without warning. But in those cases my own position,
while technically right, was not quite so sound commercially as in my coffee trade. You
cannot be dead sure of anything in a speculative operation. It was the experience I have
just told you that made me add the unexpectable to the unexpected in my list of hazards.
After the coffee episode I was so successful in other commodities and on the short side
of the stock market, that I began to suffer from silly gossip. The professionals in Wall
Street and the newspaper writers got the habit of blaming me and my alleged raids for
the inevitable breaks in prices. At times my selling was called unpatriotic whether I was
really selling or not. The reason for exaggerating the magnitude and the effect of my
operations, I suppose, was the need to satisfy the public's insatiable demand for reasons
for each and every price movement.
As I have said a thousand times, no manipulation can put stocks down and keep them
down. There is nothing mysterious about this. The reason is plain to everybody who will
take the trouble to think about it half a minute. Suppose an operator raided a stock that
is, put the price down to a level below its real value what would inevitably happen?
Why, the raider would at once be up against the best kind of inside buying. The people
who know what a stock is worth will always buy it when it is selling at bargain prices. If
the insiders are not able to buy, it will be because general conditions are against their
free command of their own resources, and such conditions are not bull conditions. When
people speak about raids the inference is that the raids are unjustified; almost criminal.
But selling a stock down to a price much below what it is worth is mighty dangerous
business. It is well to bear in mind that a raided stock that fails to rally is not getting
much inside buying and where there is a raid that is, unjustified short selling there is
usually apt to be inside buying; and when there is that, the price does not stay down. I
should say that in ninety-nine cases out of a hundred, so-called raids are really legitimate
declines, accelerated at times but not primarily caused by the operations of a
professional trader, however big a line he may be able to swing.
The theory that most of the sudden declines or particular sharp breaks are the results of
some plunger's operations probably was invented as an easy way of supplying reasons to
those speculators who, being nothing but blind gamblers, will believe anything that is
told them rather than do a little thinking. The raid excuse for losses that unfortunate
speculators so often receive from brokers and financial gossipers is really an inverted
tip. The difference lies in this: A bear tip is distinct, positive advice to sell short. But the
inverted tip that is, the explanation that does not explain serves merely to keep you from
wisely selling short. The natural tendency when a stock breaks badly is to sell it. There
is a reason an unknown reason but a good reason; therefore get out. But it is not wise to
get out when the break is the result of a raid by an operator, because the moment he
stops the price must rebound. Inverted tips!


Chapter XVI
Tips! How people want tips! They crave not only to get them but to give them. There is
greed involved, and vanity. It is very amusing, at times, to watch really intelligent
people fish for them. And the tip-giver need not hesitate about the quality, for the tipseeker
is not really after good tips, but after any tip. If it makes good, fine! If it doesn't,
better luck with the next. I am thinking of the average customer of the average
commission house. There is a type of promoter or manipulator that believes in tips first,
last and all the time. A good flow of tips is considered by him as a sort of sublimated
publicity work, the best merchandising dope in the world, for, since tip-seekers and tiptakers
are invariably tip-passers, tip-broadcasting becomes a sort of endless-chain
advertising. The tipster-promoter labours under the delusion that no human being
breathes who can resist a tip if properly delivered. He studies the art of handing them out
artistically.
I get tips by the hundreds every clay from all sorts of people. I'll tell you a story about
Borneo Tin. You remember when the stock was brought out? It was at the height of the
boom. The promoter's pool had taken the advice of a very clever banker and decided to
float the new company in the open market at once instead of letting an underwriting
syndicate take its time about it. It was good advice. The only mistake the members of the
pool made came from inexperience. They did not know what the stock market was
capable of doing during a crazy boom and at the same time they were not intelligently
liberal. They were agreed on the need of marking up the price in order to market the
stock, but they started the trading at a figure at which the traders and the speculative
pioneers could not buy it without misgivings.
By rights the promoters ought to have got stuck with it, but in the wild bull market their
hoggishness turned out to be rank conservatism. The public was buying anything that
was adequately tipped. Investments were not wanted. The demand was for easy money;
for the sure gambling profit. Gold was pouring into this country through the huge
purchases of war material. They tell me that the promoters, while making their plans for
bringing out Borneo stock, marked up the opening price three different times before
their first transaction was officially recorded for the benefit of the public.
I had been approached to join the pool and I had looked into it but I didn't accept the
offer because if there is any market manoeuvring to do, I like to do it myself. I trade on
my own information and follow my own methods. When Borneo Tin was brought out,
knowing what the pool's resources were and what they had planned to do, and also
knowing what the public was capable of, I bought ten thousand shares during the first
hour of the first day. Its market debut was successful at least to that extent. As a matter
of fact the promoters found the demand so active that they decided it would be a mistake
to lose so much stock so soon. They found out that I had acquired my ten thousand
shares about at the same time that they found out that they would probably be able to
sell every share they owned if they merely marked up the price twenty-five or thirty
points. They therefore concluded that the profit on my ten thousand shares would take
too big a chunk out of the millions they felt were already as good as banked. So they
actually ceased their bull operations and tried to shake me out. But I simply sat tight.
They gave me up as a bad job because they didn't want the market to get away from
them, and then they began to put up the price, without losing any more stock than they
could help.
They saw the crazy height that other stocks rose to and they began to think in billions.
Well, when Borneo Tin got up to 120 I let them have my ten thousand shares. It checked
the rise and the pool managers let up on their jacking-up process. On the next general
rally they again tried to make an active market for it and disposed of quite a little, but
the merchandising proved to be rather expensive. Finally they marked it up to 150. But
the bloom was off the bull market for keeps, so the pool was compelled to market what
stock it could on the way down to those people who love to buy after a good reaction, on
the fallacy that a stock that has once sold at 150 must be cheap at 130 and a great
bargain at 120. Also, they passed the tip first to the floor traders, who often are able to
make a temporary market, and later to the commission houses. Every little helped and
the pool was using every device known. The trouble was that the time for bulling stocks
had passed. The suckers had swallowed other hooks. The Borneo bunch didn't or
wouldn't see it.
I was down in Palm Beach with my wife. One day I made a little money at Gridley's and
when I got home I gave Mrs. Livingston a five-hundred-dollar bill out of it. It was a
curious coincidence, but that same night she met at a dinner the president of the Borneo
Tin Company, a Mr. Wisenstein, who had become the manager of the stock pool. We
didn't learn until some time afterward that this Wisenstein deliberately manoeuvred so
that he sat next to Mrs. Livingston at dinner.
He laid himself out to be particularly nice to her and talked most entertainingly. In the
end he told her, very confidentially, "Mrs. Livingston, I'm going to do something I've
never done before. I am very glad to do it because you know exactly what it means." He
stopped and looked at Mrs. Livingston anxiously, to make sure she was not only wise
but discreet. She could read it on his face, plain as print. But all she said was, "Yes."
"Yes, Mrs. Livingston. It has been a very great pleasure to meet you and your husband,
and I want to prove that I am sincere in saying this because I hope to see a great deal of
both of you. I am sure I don't have to tell you that what I am going to say is strictly
confidential!" Then he whispered, "If you will buy some Borneo Tin you will make a
great deal of money."
"Do you think so?" she asked.
"Just before I left the hotel," he said, "I received some cables with news that won't be
known to the public for several days at least. I am going to gather in as much of the
stock as I can. If you get some at the opening to-morrow you will be buying it at the
same time and at the same price as I. I give you my word that Borneo Tin will surely
advance. You are the only person that I have told this to. Absolutely the only one!"
She thanked him and then she told him that she didn't know anything about speculating
in stocks. But he assured her it wasn't necessary for her to know any more than he had
told her. To make sure she heard it correctly he repeated his advice to her:
"All you have to do is to buy as much Borneo Tin as you wish. I can give you my word
that if you do you will not lose a cent. I've never before told a woman or a man, for that
matter to buy anything in my life. But I am so sure the stock won't stop this side of 200
that I'd like you to make some money. I can't buy all the stock myself, you know, and if
somebody besides myself is going to benefit by the rise I'd rather it was you than some
stranger. Much rather! I've told you in confidence because I know you won't talk about
it. Take my word for it, Mrs. Livingston, and buy Borneo Tin!"
He was very earnest about it and succeeded in so impressing her that she began to think
she had found an excellent use for the five hundred dollars I had given her that
afternoon. That money hadn't cost me anything and was outside of her allowance. In
other words, it was easy money to lose if the luck went against her. But he had said she
would surely win. It would be nice to make money on her own hook and tell me all
about it afterwards.
Well, sir, the very next morning before the market opened she went into Harding's office
and said to the manager:
"Mr. Haley, I want to buy some stock, but I don't want it to go in my regular account
because I don't wish my husband to know anything about it until I've made some money.
Can you fix it for me?"
Haley, the manager, said, "Oh, yes. We can make it a special account. What's the stock
and how much of it do you want to buy?"
She gave him the five hundred dollars and told him, "Listen, please. I do not wish to lose
more than this money. If that goes I don't want to owe you anything; and remember, I
don't want Mr. Livingston to know anything about this. Buy me as much Borneo Tin as
you can for the money, at the opening."
Haley took the money and told her he'd never say a word to a soul, and bought her a
hundred shares at the opening. I think she got it at 108. The stock was very active that
day and closed at an advance of three points. Mrs. Livingston was so delighted with her
exploit that it was all she could do to keep from telling me all about it.
It so happened that I had been getting more and more bearish on the general market. The
unusual activity in Borneo Tin drew my attention to it. I didn't think the time was right
for any stock to advance, much less one like that. I had decided to begin my bear
operations that very day, and I started by selling about ten thousand shares of Borneo. If
I had not I rather think the stock would have gone up five or six points instead of three.
On the very next day I sold two thousand shares at the opening and two thousand shares
just before the close, and the stock broke to 102.
Haley, the manager of Harding Brothers' Palm Beach Branch, was waiting for Mrs.
Livingston to call there on the third morning. She usually strolled in about eleven to see
how things were, if I was doing anything.
Haley took her aside and said, "Mrs. Livingston, if you want me to carry that hundred
shares of Borneo Tin for you, you will have to give me more margin."
"But I haven't any more," she told him.
"I can transfer it to your regular account," he said.
"No," she objected, "because that way L. L. would learn about it."
"But the account already shows a loss of " he began.
"But I told you distinctly I didn't want to lose more than the five hundred dollars. I didn't
even want to lose that," she said.
"I know, Mrs. Livingston, but I didn't want to sell it without consulting you, and now
unless you authorise me to hold it I'll have to let it go."
"But it did so nicely the day I bought it," she said, "that I didn't believe it would act this
way so soon. Did you?"
"No," answered Haley, "I didn't." They have to be diplomatic in brokers' offices.
"What's gone wrong with it, Mr. Haley?"
Haley knew, but he could not tell her without giving me away, and a customer's business
is sacred. So he said, "I don't hear anything special about it, one way or another. There
she goes! That's low for the move!" and he pointed to the quotation board.
Mrs. Livingston gazed at the sinking stock and cried: "Oh, Mr. Haley! I didn't want to
lose my five hundred dollars! What shall I do?"
"I don't know, Mrs. Livingston, but if I were you I'd ask Mr. Livingston."
"Oh, no! He doesn't want me to speculate on my own hook. He's told me so. He'll buy or
sell stock for me, if I ask him, but I've never before done trading that he did not know all
about. I wouldn't dare tell him."
"That's all right," said Haley soothingly. "He is a wonderful trader and he'll know just
what to do." Seeing her shake her head violently he added devilishly: "Or else you put
up a thousand or two to take care of your Borneo."
The alternative decided her then and there. She hung about the office, but as the market
got weaker and weaker she came over to where I sat watching the board and told me she
wanted to speak to me. We went into the private office and she told me the whole story.
So I just said to her: "You foolish little girl, you keep your hands off this deal."
She promised that she would, and so I gave her back her five hundred dollars and she
went away happy. The stock was par by that time.
I saw what had happened. Wisenstein was an astute person. He figured that Mrs.
Livingston would tell me what he had told her and I'd study the stock. He knew that
activity always attracted me and I was known to swing a pretty fair line. I suppose he
thought I'd buy ten or twenty thousand shares.
It was one of the most cleverly planned and artistically propelled tips I've ever heard of.
But it went wrong. It had to. In the first place, the lady had that very day received an
unearned five hundred dollars and was therefore in a much more venturesome mood
than usual. She wished to make some money all by herself, and womanlike dramatised
the temptation so attractively that it was irresistible. She knew how I felt about stock
speculation as practised by outsiders, and she didn't dare mention the matter to me.
Wisenstein didn't size up her psychology right.
He also was utterly wrong in his guess about the kind of trader I was. I never take tips
and I was bearish on the entire market. The tactics that he thought would prove effective
in inducing me to buy Borneo that is, the activity and the three-point rise were precisely
what made me pick Borneo as a starter when I decided to sell the entire market.
After I heard Mrs. Livingston's story I was keener than ever to sell Borneo. Every
morning at the opening and every afternoon just before closing I let him have some
stock regularly, until I saw a chance to take in my shorts at a handsome profit.
It has always seemed to me the height of damfoolishness to trade on tips. I suppose I am
not built the way a tip-taker is. I sometimes think that tip-takers are like drunkards.
There are some who can't resist the craving and always look forward to those jags which
they consider indispensable to their happiness. It is so easy to open your ears and let the
tip in. To be told precisely what to do to be happy in such a manner that you can easily
obey is the next nicest thing to being happy which is a mighty long first step toward the
fulfilment of your heart's desire. It is not so much greed made blind by eagerness as it is
hope bandaged by the unwillingness to do any thinking.
And it is not only among the outside public that you find inveterate tip-takers. The
professional trader on the floor of the New York Stock Exchange is quite as bad. I am
definitely aware that no end of them cherish mistaken notions of me because I never
give anybody tips. If I told the average man, "Sell yourself five thousand Steel!" he
would do it on the spot. But if I tell him I am quite bearish on the entire market and give
him my reasons in detail, he finds trouble in listening and after I'm done talking he will
glare at me for wasting his time expressing my views on general conditions instead of
giving him a direct and specific tip, like a real philanthropist of the type that is so
abundant in Wall Street the sort who loves to put millions into the pockets of friends,
acquaintances and utter strangers alike.
The belief in miracles that all men cherish is born of immoderate indulgence in hope.
There are people who go on hope sprees periodically and we all know the chronic hope
drunkard that is held up before us as an exemplary optimist. Tip-takers are all they really
are.
I have an acquaintance, a member of the New York Stock Exchange, who was one of
those who thought I was a selfish, cold-blooded pig because I never gave tips or put
friends into things. One day this was some years ago he was talking to a newspaper man
who casually mentioned that he had had it from a good source that G. O. H. was going
up. My broker friend promptly bought a thousand shares and saw the price decline so
quickly that he was out thirty-five hundred dollars before he could stop his loss. He met
the newspaper man a day or two later, while he still was sore.
"That was a hell of a tip you gave me," he complained.
"What tip was that?" asked the reporter, who did not remember.
"About G. O. H. You said you had it from a good source."
"So I did. A director of the company who is a member of the finance committee told
me."
"Which of them was it?" asked the broker vindictively.
"If you must know," answered the newspaper man, "it was your own father-in-law, Mr.
Westlake."
"Why in Hades didn't you tell me you meant him!" yelled the broker. "You cost me
thirty-five hundred dollars!" He didn't believe in family tips. The farther away the source
the purer the tip.
Old Westlake was a rich and successful banker and promoter. He ran across John W.
Gates one day. Gates asked him what he knew. "If you will act on it I'll give you a tip.
If you won't I'll save my breath," answered old Westlake grumpily.
"Of course I'll act on it," promised Gates cheerfully.
"Sell Reading! There is a sure twenty-five points in it, and possibly more. But twentyfive
absolutely certain," said Westlake impressively.
"I'm much obliged to you," and Bet-you-a-million Gates shook hands warmly and went
away in the direction of his broker's office.
Westlake had specialized on Reading. He knew all about the company and stood in with
the insiders so that the market for the stock was an open book to him and everybody
knew it. Now he was advising the western plunger to go short of it.
Well, Reading never stopped going up. It rose something like one hundred points in a
few weeks. One day old West-lake ran smack up against John W. in the Street, but he
made out he hadn't seen him and was walking on. John W. Gates caught up with him,
his face all smiles and held out his hand. Old Westlake shook it dazedly.
"I want to thank you for that tip you gave me on Reading," said Gates.
"I didn't give you any tip," said Westlake, frowning.
"Sure you did. And it was a Jim Hickey of a tip too. I made sixty thousand dollars."
"Made sixty thousand dollars?"
"Sure! Don't you remember? You told me to sell Reading; so I bought it! I've always
made money coppering your tips, Westlake," said John W. Gates pleasantly. "Always!"
Old Westlake looked at the bluff Westerner and presently remarked admiringly, "Gates,
what a rich man I'd be if I had your brains!"
The other day I met Mr. W. A. Rogers, the famous cartoonist, whose Wall Street
drawings brokers so greatly admire. His daily cartoons in the New York Herald for years
gave pleasure to thousands. Well, he told me a story. It was just before we went to war
with Spain. He was spending an evening with a broker friend. When he left he picked up
his derby hat from the rack, at least he thought it was his hat, for it was the same shape
and fitted him perfectly.
The Street at that time was thinking and talking of nothing but war with Spain. Was
there to be one or not? If it was to be war the market would go down; not so much on
our own selling as on pressure from European holders of our securities. If peace, it
would be a cinch to buy stocks, as there had been considerable declines prompted by the
sensational clamorings of the yellow papers. Mr. Rogers told me the rest of the story as
follows:
"My friend, the broker, at whose house I had been the night before, stood in the
Exchange the next day anxiously debating in his mind which side of the market to play.
He went over the pros and cons, but it was impossible to distinguish which were
rumours and which were facts. There was no authentic news to guide him. At one
moment he thought war was inevitable, and on the next he almost convinced himself
that it was utterly unlikely. His perplexity must have caused a rise in his temperature, for
he took off his derby to wipe his fevered brow. He couldn't tell whether he should buy or
sell.
"He happened to look inside of his hat. There in gold letters was the word WAR. That
was all the hunch he needed. Was it not a tip from Providence via my hat? So he sold a
raft of stock, war was duly declared, he covered on the break and made a killing." And
then W. A. Rogers finished, "I never got back that hat!"
But the prize tip story of my collection concerns one of the most popular members of the
New York Stock Exchange, J. T. Hood. One day another floor trader, Bert Walker, told
him that he had done a good turn to a prominent director of the Atlantic & Southern. In
return the grateful insider told him to buy all the A. & S. he could carry. The directors
were going to do something that would put the stock up at least twenty-five points. All
the directors were not in the deal, but the majority would be sure to vote as wanted.
Bert Walker concluded that the dividend rate was going to be raised. He told his friend
Hood and they each bought a couple of thousand shares of A. & S. The stock was very
weak, before and after they bought, but Hood said that was obviously intended to
facilitate accumulation by the inside clique, headed by Bert's grateful friend.
On the following Thursday, after the market closed, the directors of the Atlantic &
Southern met and passed the dividend. The stock broke six points in the first six minutes
of trading Friday morning.
Bert Walker was sore as a pup. He called on the grateful director, who was brokenhearted
about it and very penitent. He said that he had forgotten that he had told Walker
to buy. That was the reason he had neglected to call him up to tell him of a change in the
plans of the dominant faction in the board. The remorseful director was so anxious to
make up that he gave Bert another tip. He kindly explained that a couple of his
colleagues wanted to get cheap stock and against his judgment resorted to coarse work.
He had to yield to win their votes. But now that they all had accumulated their full lines
there was nothing to stop the advance. It was a double, riveted, lead-pipe cinch to buy A.
& S. now.
Bert not only forgave him but shook hands warmly with the high financier. Naturally he
hastened to find his friend and fellow-victim, Hood, to impart the glad tidings to him.
They were going to make a killing. The stock had been tipped for a rise before and they
bought. But now it was fifteen points lower. That made it a cinch. So they bought five
thousand shares, joint account.
As if they had rung a bell to start it, the stock broke badly on what quite obviously was
inside selling. Two specialists cheerfully confirmed the suspicion. Hood sold out their
five thousand shares. When he got through Bert Walker said to him, "If that blanketyblank
blanker hadn't gone to Florida day before yesterday I'd lick the stuffing out of him.
Yes, I would. But you come with me."
"Where to?" asked Hood.
"To the telegraph office. I want to send that skunk a telegram that he'll never forget.
Come on."
Hood went on. Bert led the way to the telegraph office. There, carried away by his
feelings they had taken quite a loss on the five thousand shares he composed a
masterpiece of vituperation. He read it to Hood and finished, "That will come pretty near
to showing him what I think of him."
He was about to slide it toward the waiting clerk when Hood said, "Hold on, Bert!"
"What's the matter?"
"I wouldn't send it," advised Hood earnestly.
"Why not?" snapped Bert.
"It will make him sore as the dickens."
"That's what we want, isn't it?" said Bert, looking at Hood in surprise.
But Hood shook his head disapprovingly and said in all seriousness, "We'll never get
another tip from him if you send that telegram!"
A professional trader actually said that. Now what's the use of talking about sucker tiptakers?
Men do not take tips because they are bally asses but because they like those
hope cocktails I spoke of. Old Baron Rothschild's recipe for wealth winning applies with
greater force than ever to speculation. Somebody asked him if making money in the
Bourse was not a very difficult matter, and he replied that, on the contrary, he thought it
was very easy.
"That is because you are so rich," objected the interviewer.
"Not at all. I have found an easy way and I stick to it. I simply cannot help making
money. I will tell you my secret if you wish. It is this : I never buy at the bottom and I
always sell too soon."
Investors are a different breed of cats. Most of them go in strong for inventories and
statistics of earnings and all sorts of mathematical data, as though that meant facts and
certainties. The human factor is minimised as a rule. Very few people like to buy into a
one-man business. But the wisest investor I ever knew was a man who began by being a
Pennsylvania Dutchman and followed it up by coming to Wall Street and seeing a great
deal of Russell Sage.
He was a great investigator, an indefatigable Missourian. He believed in asking his own
questions and in doing his seeing with his own eyes. He had no use for another man's
spectacles. This was years ago. It seems he held quite a little Atchison. Presently he
began to hear disquieting reports about the company and its management. He was told
that Mr. Reinhart, the president, instead of being the marvel he was credited with being,
in reality was a most extravagant manager whose recklessness was fast pushing the
company into a mess. There would be the deuce to pay on the inevitable day of
reckoning.
This was precisely the kind of news that was as the breath of life to the Pennsylvania
Dutchman. He hurried over to Boston to interview Mr. Reinhart and ask him a few
questions. The questions consisted of repeating the accusations he had heard and then
asking the president of the Atchison, Topeka & Santa Fe Railroad if they were true.
Mr. Reinhart not only denied the allegations emphatically but said even more: He
proceeded to prove by figures that the allegators were malicious liars. The Pennsylvania
Dutchman had asked for exact information and the president gave it to him, showing
him what the company was doing and how it stood financially, to a cent.
The Pennsylvania Dutchman thanked President Reinhart, returned to New York and
promptly sold all his Atchison holdings. A week or so later he used his idle funds to buy
a big lot of Delaware, Lackawanna & Western.
Years afterward we were talking of lucky swaps and he cited his own case. He explained
what prompted him to make it.
"You see," he said, "I noticed that President Reinhart, when he wrote down figures, took
sheets of letter paper from a pigeonhole in his mahogany roll-top desk. It was fine heavy
linen paper with beautifully engraved letterheads in two colors. It was not only very
expensive but worse it was unnecessarily expensive. He would write a few figures on a
sheet to show me exactly what the company was earning on certain divisions or to prove
how they were cutting down expenses or reducing operating costs, and then he would
crumple up the sheet of the expensive paper and throw it in the waste-basket. Pretty soon
he would want to impress me with the economies they were introducing and he would
reach for a fresh sheet of the beautiful notepaper with the engraved letterheads in two
colors. A few figures and bingo, into the waste-basket! More money wasted without a
thought. It struck me that if the president was that kind of a man he would scarcely be
likely to insist upon having or rewarding economical assistants. I therefore decided to
believe the people who had told me the management was extravagant instead of
accepting the president's version and I sold what Atchison stock I held.
"It so happened that I had occasion to go to the offices of the Delaware, Lackawanna &
Western a few days later. Old Sam Sloan was the president. His office was the nearest to
the entrance and his door was wide open. It was always open. Nobody could walk into
the general offices of the D. L. & W. in those days and not see the president of the
company seated at his desk. Any man could walk in and do business with him right off,
if he had any business to do. The financial reporters used to tell me that they never had
to beat about the bush with old Sam Sloan, but would ask their questions and get a
straight yes or no from him, no matter what the stock-market exigencies of the other
directors might be.
"When I walked in I saw the old man was busy. I thought at first that he was opening his
mail, but after I got inside close to the desk I saw what he was doing. I learned
afterwards that it was his daily custom to do it. After the mail was sorted and opened,
instead of throwing away the empty envelopes he had them gathered up and taken to his
office. In his leisure moments he would rip the envelope all around. That gave him two
bits of paper, each with one clean blank side. He would pile these up and then he would
have them distributed about, to be used in lieu of scratch pads for such figuring as
Reinhart had done for me on engraved notepaper. No waste of empty envelopes and no
waste of the president's idle moments. Everything utilised.
"It struck me that if that was the kind of man the D. L. & W. had for president, the
company was managed economically in all departments. The president would see to
that! Of course I knew the company was paying regular dividends and had a good
property. I bought all the D. L. & W. stock I could. Since that time the capital stock has
been doubled and quadrupled. My annual dividends amount to as much as my original
investment. I still have my D. L. & W. And Atchison went into the hands of a receiver a
few months after I saw the president throwing sheet after sheet of linen paper with
engraved letterheads in two colors into the waste-basket to prove to me with figures that
he was not extravagant."
And the beauty of that story is that it is true and that no other stock that the Pennsylvania
Dutchman could have bought would have proved to be so good an investment as D. L. & W.



Chapter XVII
